Warriors

Power of Three

Sunrise





Erin Hunter





To Lynn and Steve Wiman, with heartfelt thanks





Contents



Allegiances

Map





Prologue


Moonlight washed over the stone hollow,

bright as day, but…





Chapter 1


Dead bracken rustled beneath Lionblaze’s

paws as he stalked through…





Chapter 2


A chilly wind was blowing from the moor

when Firestar…





Chapter 3


Jayfeather sat still while the rest of the Clan

swirled…





Chapter 4


Frost lay thick on the ground as

Brambleclaw’s patrol headed…





Chapter 5


As the patrol crossed the next field, snow

began to…





Chapter 6


Hollyleaf leaped forward with her Clanmates.

As they reached the…





Chapter 7


Jayfeather stood in the clearing after the Sol

patrol had…





Chapter 8


Lionblaze forgot to breathe as he stared

across the vast…





Chapter 9


Jayfeather woke when a cold breeze ruffled

his fur. “We…





Chapter 10


Hollyleaf shifted uneasily in the makeshift



nest under the tree…





Chapter 11


Lionblaze heard his sister screeching, but he

ignored it. He…





Chapter 12


Jayfeather shifted uncomfortably on the bare

earth. How was any…





Chapter 13


Hollyleaf blinked in surprise when she woke

among the stone…





Chapter 14


Hollyleaf whirled around. Behind her, in an

arched opening, a…





Chapter 15


“Thanks, Jayfeather,” Whitewing purred as

Jayfeather dropped a leaf wrap…





Chapter 16


Lionblaze woke to the sound of excited

mewing and movement…





Chapter 17


Hollyleaf pushed her way through the thorn

tunnel with a…





Chapter 18


Lionblaze led Foxpaw and Icepaw into the

forest to collect…





Chapter 19


Jayfeather padded in Leafpool’s paw steps

as she climbed to…





Chapter 20


Jayfeather wriggled around and sniffed


where some scraps of the…





Chapter 21


Hollyleaf blinked wearily in the misty dawn as

the elders…





Chapter 22


Jayfeather struggled through snow that


reached up to his belly…





Chapter 23


Lionblaze slid out of the camp through the

dirtplace tunnel…





Chapter 24


Hollyleaf’s pelt prickled with frustration as

she and her…





Chapter 25


Sunhigh had come and gone by the time

Hollyleaf and…





Chapter 26


By the time the three littermates stumbled

back into the…





Chapter 27


The rest of the day passed in a haze of…





Chapter 28


Jayfeather slid through the thorn tunnel and

stood panting in…

Acknowledgments

About the Author



Other Books by Erin Hunter

Credits

Copyright

About the Publisher





ALLEGIANCES



THUNDERCLAN



LEADER FIRESTAR—ginger tom with a

flame-colored pelt

DEPUTY

BRAMBLECLAW—dark

brown

tabby tom with amber eyes

MEDICINE CAT LEAFPOOL—light brown

tabby she-cat with amber eyes

APPRENTICE, JAYFEATHER

WARRIORS (toms and she-cats without kits)

SQUIRRELFLIGHT—dark ginger she-cat with



green eyes

APPRENTICE, FOXPAW

DUSTPELT—dark brown tabby tom

SANDSTORM—pale ginger she-cat with green

eyes

CLOUDTAIL—long-haired white tom with blue

eyes

BRACKENFUR—golden brown tabby tom

SORRELTAIL—tortoiseshel -and-white she-cat

with amber eyes

THORNCLAW—golden brown tabby tom

BRIGHTHEART—white she-cat with ginger

patches

SPIDERLEG—long-limbed black tom with

brown underbel y and amber eyes

WHITEWING—white she-cat with green eyes

APPRENTICE, ICEPAW

BIRCHFALL—light brown tabby tom

GRAYSTRIPE—long-haired gray tom

BERRYNOSE—cream-colored tom

HAZELTAIL—smal gray-and-white she-cat

MOUSEWHISKER—gray-and-white tom

CINDERHEART—gray tabby she-cat



HONEYFERN—light brown tabby she-cat

POPPYFROST—tortoiseshel she-cat

LIONBLAZE—golden tabby tom with amber

eyes

HOLLYLEAF—black she-cat with green eyes

APPRENTICES (more than six moons old, in

training to become warriors)

FOXPAW—reddish tabby tom

ICEPAW—white she-cat

QUEENS (she-cats expecting or nursing kits)

FERNCLOUD—pale gray (with darker flecks)

she-cat with green eyes

DAISY—cream long-furred cat from the

horseplace, mother of Spiderleg’s kits: Rosekit

(dark cream she-cat) and Toadkit (black-and-

white tom)

MILLIE—striped gray tabby she-cat, former

kittypet, mother of Graystripe’s kits: Briarkit (dark brown she-cat), Bumblekit (very pale gray

tom with black stripes), and Blossomkit (pale

brown she-cat with a dark stripe along her

spine)

ELDERS (former warriors and queens, now



retired)

LONGTAIL—pale tabby tom with dark black

stripes, retired early due to failing sight

MOUSEFUR—smal dusky brown she-cat

SHADOWCLAN



LEADER BLACKSTAR—large white tom with

huge jet-black paws

DEPUTY RUSSETFUR—dark ginger she-cat

MEDICINE CAT LITTLECLOUD—very smal

tabby tom

APPRENTICE, FLAMEPAW (ginger

tom)

WARRIORS OAKFUR—smal brown tom

APPRENTICE,

TIGERPAW

(dark

brown tabby tom)



ROWANCLAW—ginger tom

SMOKEFOOT—black tom

APPRENTICE, OWLPAW (light brown tabby

tom)

IVYTAIL—black, white, and tortoiseshel she-

cat

APPRENTICE, DAWNPAW (cream-furred

she-cat)

TOADFOOT—dark brown tom

CROWFROST—black-and-white tom

APPRENTICE, OLIVEPAW (tortoiseshel she-

cat)

KINKFUR—tabby she-cat, with long fur that

sticks out at al angles

RATSCAR—brown tom with long scar across

his back

APPRENTICE, SHREWPAW (gray she-cat

with black feet)

SNAKETAIL—dark brown tom with tabby-

striped tail

APPRENTICE, SCORCHPAW (dark gray tom)

WHITEWATER—white she-cat with long fur,

blind in one eye



APPRENTICE, REDPAW (mottled brown and

ginger tom)

TAWNYPELT—tortoiseshel she-cat with green

eyes

QUEENS SNOWBIRD—pure-white she-cat

ELDERS CEDARHEART—dark gray tom

TALLPOPPY—long-legged light brown tabby

she-cat

WINDCLAN



LEADER ONESTAR—brown tabby tom

DEPUTY ASHFOOT—gray she-cat

MEDICINE CAT BARKFACE—short-tailed

brown tom

APPRENTICE,

KESTRELPAW

(mottled gray tom)



WARRIORS TORNEAR—tabby tom

CROWFEATHER—dark gray tom

OWLWHISKER—light brown tabby tom

WHITETAIL—smal white she-cat

NIGHTCLOUD—black she-cat

GORSETAIL—very pale gray-and-white cat

with blue eyes

WEASELFUR—ginger tom with white paws

HARESPRING—brown-and-white tom

LEAFTAIL—dark tabby tom with amber eyes

APPRENTICE, THISTLEPAW (long-haired

white tom)

DEWSPOTS—spotted gray tabby she-cat

APPRENTICE, SEDGEPAW (light brown

tabby she-cat)

WILLOWCLAW—gray she-cat

APPRENTICE, SWALLOWPAW (dark gray

she-cat)

ANTPELT—brown tom with one black ear

EMBERFOOT—gray tom with two dark paws

APPRENTICE, SUNPAW (tortoiseshel she-

cat with large white mark on her forehead)

HEATHERTAIL—light brown tabby she-cat



with blue eyes

BREEZEPELT—black tom with amber eyes

ELDERS

MORNINGFLOWER—very

old

tortoiseshel queen

WEBFOOT—dark gray tabby tom

RIVERCLAN



LEADER LEOPARDSTAR—unusual y spotted

golden tabby she-cat

DEPUTY MISTYFOOT—gray she-cat with blue

eyes

MEDICINE CAT MOTHWING—dappled golden

she-cat

APPRENTICE, WILLOWSHINE (gray

tabby she-cat)

WARRIORS BLACKCLAW—smoky black tom



VOLETOOTH—smal brown tabby tom

APPRENTICE, MINNOWPAW (dark gray she-

cat)

REEDWHISKER—black tom

MOSSPELT—tortoiseshel she-cat with blue

eyes

APPRENTICE, PEBBLEPAW (mottled gray

tom)

BEECHFUR—light brown tom

RIPPLETAIL—dark gray tabby tom

APPRENTICE, MALLOWPAW (light brown

tabby tom)

GRAYMIST—pale gray tabby

DAWNFLOWER—pale gray she-cat

DAPPLENOSE—mottled gray she-cat

POUNCETAIL—ginger-and-white tom

MINTFUR—light gray tabby tom

APPRENTICE, NETTLEPAW (dark brown

tabby tom)

OTTERHEART—dark brown she-cat

APPRENTICE, SNEEZEPAW (gray-and-white

tom)

PINEFUR—very short-haired tabby she-cat



APPRENTICE, ROBINPAW (tortoiseshel -and-

white tom)

RAINSTORM—mottled gray-blue tom

DUSKFUR—brown tabby she-cat

APPRENTICE, COPPERPAW (dark ginger

she-cat)

QUEENS ICEWING—white cat with blue eyes,

mother of Beetlekit, Pricklekit, Petalkit,

and Grasskit

ELDERS HEAVYSTEP—thickset tabby tom

SWALLOWTAIL—dark tabby she-cat

STONESTREAM—gray tom



CATS OUTSIDE CLANS



SOL—white-and-brown tabby long-haired tom

with pale yel ow eyes

SMOKY—muscular gray-and-white tom who

lives in a barn at the horseplace

FLOSS—smal gray-and-white she-cat who

lives at the horseplace

PURDY—elderly, plump tabby loner with a gray

muzzle

JINGO—dark brown tabby she-cat

HUSSAR—broad-shouldered gray tom

SPECKLE—flecked brown she-cat, nursing

four kits

FRITZ—black-and-white tom with a torn ear

POD—scrawny brown tom with a gray muzzle



JET—long-haired black tom

MERRY—ginger-and-white she-cat

CHIRP—pale gray tabby tom

OTHER ANIMALS



MIDNIGHT—a star-gazing badger who lives by

the sea





Map





PROLOGUE


Moonlight washed over the stone hollow, bright as

day, but beneath the bushes and at the edges under

the cliffs, dark shadows seemed to uncoil like claws.

Leafpool crouched over Ashfur’s limp body. The pale

light turned his gray fur to silver as she groomed it for his burial. Beside her, Jayfeather helped, smoothing Ashfur’s tail and fluffing it up as it dried.

Leafpool raised her head to gaze up at the icy glitter cast by her warrior ancestors. “May StarClan light your path, Ashfur.” She let her voice fal softly into the cold air as she repeated the words used by

medicine cats for more seasons than any cat could

count, whenever a Clanmate died. “May you find good hunting, swift running, and shelter when you sleep.”

The words that should have comforted her,

promising a long and happy life for the fal en warrior, instead hurt her, sharper than thorns. Her mind fil ed with the moment she had discovered the neat



teethmarks in Ashfur’s neck. Too smal for a dog, too clean for a fox, too sharp for a badger. Only a cat could have left them. But which cat? Who hated Ashfur enough to kil him in cold blood, leaving no signs of a struggle? Had it been an honest clash over borders or stolen prey? Could it have been a WindClan cat, or a passing rogue? Please,

StarClan, let it be that!

The thought that a ThunderClan cat might have murdered Ashfur made Leafpool cold to her bones.

Ashfur had been outspoken and strong-wil ed, yes, but a loyal and respected warrior as wel . Surely none of his Clanmates had any reason to want him

dead?

Bending over his body again, Leafpool began to

clean earth and grit out of the dead warrior’s pads.

Something soft and light fluttered against her muzzle; she drew back to see a tuft of fur snagged in Ashfur’s claws.

No! This can’t be true! Leaning closer, Leafpool

sniffed the fur. I know that scent!

Desperately she tried to convince herself that the

clump of fur had come from one of the cats who had

carried Ashfur back to the camp from where he had



been found, floating in the stream on the WindClan border. But the smel of river water was too strong to have come from a cat with dry fur, and besides, Ashfur’s claws were soft and limp now. They would flex rather than pul out a tuft of hair if they brushed against another cat.

The only cat this tuft of fur could have come from

was Ashfur’s kil er.

Breathless and shaking, Leafpool gently teased

out the fur and carried it into her den. She forced her trembling paws to place the tuft on a leaf, which she folded into a tight wrap. Then she pushed it right to the back of her store, deep into the cleft in the rock, behind the last bundle of herbs. The truth about Ashfur’s death must never come out.

In more pain than she had ever imagined she

could feel without dying, she asked herself: Was all this my fault?





With a snarl, Yel owfang leaped on Bluestar,

bowling her over and pinning her down in the lush grass of the forest where StarClan walked. “This is al your fault!” she spat. “None of this would have happened if you hadn’t left that wretched secret to fester in ThunderClan.”

Bluestar battered at Yel owfang’s bel y with her hind paws, but couldn’t dislodge the former medicine cat’s grip. “What’s wrong with you?” she hissed.

“Don’t forget that I was your Clan leader.”

Al the respect that Yel owfang had once felt for the former ThunderClan leader had vanished. Their

shared history crumbled to dust in the face of the terrible future she foresaw for the Clan she had made her own.

“Your secret has been like a maggot eating away

inside an apple,” Yel owfang growled, her bared fangs close to Bluestar’s ear. “ThunderClan is rotten to the core—and more blood wil be shed before the

truth comes out.”

“You can’t know that,” Bluestar protested, straining to throw off her opponent.

“A blind rabbit could see it! The truth will come out. Midnight told Sol everything. And we both know

that Sol wil return to ThunderClan.”

Summoning her trained warrior reflexes, Bluestar

butted her head into Yel owfang’s chest and

managed to slip to one side. Suddenly giving up, Yel owfang sprang away. She stood shaking her

ruffled gray pelt.

Bluestar scrambled to her paws and stood,

panting. “What’s the point of fighting?” she rasped when she had caught her breath. “The damage has

been done—and whatever you say, this is not my fault.”

Yel owfang grunted.

“I stil can’t believe Midnight betrayed us,” Bluestar went on. “I trusted her to watch over the Clans.”

“It’s not Midnight who was the traitor,” Yel owfang

pointed out, her pelt bristling. “The betrayal began with the first lies, with the secret that you have kept for al these moons. ThunderClan has been living a lie! If these three cats are as powerful as the prophecy says they are, they would have been able

to cope with the truth. Unless you think we’ve been wrong about them al along.”

“Never!” Bluestar retorted. “Who else could the Three be? I didn’t want to lie!” she added, her voice rising to a wail. “But when could I have told them?

They

have

been

happy.

Squirrelflight

and

Brambleclaw are good parents. What good would it

have done to tel them what real y happened?”

“We’l find out soon enough,” Yel owfang growled.

“Old secrets can’t stay buried forever.” She lashed her tail and began to stalk away; then she paused, glancing back over her shoulder. “And if these three cats are not strong enough to deal with the truth,” she added, “then you, Bluestar, wil have destroyed the Clan you love so much….”





CHAPTER 1


Dead bracken rustled beneath Lionblaze’s paws as

he stalked through the forest. Above the leafless trees, the sky was dark and empty. Terror raised the hairs on the young warrior’s neck, and he shivered from ears to tail-tip.

This is a place that has never known the light of

StarClan.

He padded on, skirting clumps of fern and nosing

under bushes, but he found no sight or scent of other cats. I’ve had enough of this, he thought, tugging his tail free from a trailing bramble. Panic sparked in his mind as he stared at the darkness that stretched away between the trees. What if I never find my way

out of here?

“Looking for me?”

Lionblaze jumped and spun around. “Tigerstar!”

The massive warrior had appeared around the

edge of a bramble thicket. His tabby pelt shone with a strange light that reminded Lionblaze of the sickly glow of fungus on dead trees.

“You’ve missed a lot of training,” Tigerstar

meowed, padding forward until he stood a tail-length from the ThunderClan warrior. “You should have come back sooner.”

“No, I shouldn’t!” Lionblaze blurted out. “I shouldn’t have come here at al , and you never should have trained me. Brambleclaw isn’t my father! You’re not

my kin!”

Tigerstar blinked once, but he showed no

surprise, not even a flick of his ears. His amber eyes narrowed to slits, and he seemed to be waiting for Lionblaze to say more.

“You…you knew!” Lionblaze whispered. The trees

seemed to spin around him. Squirrelflight isn’t the only cat who kept secrets!



“Of course I knew.” Tigerstar shrugged. “It’s not important. You were wil ing enough to learn from me, weren’t you?”

“But—”

“Blood isn’t everything,” Tigerstar snarled. His lip curled, showing the glint of sharp fangs. “Just ask Firestar.”

Lionblaze felt his neck fur begin to bristle as fury coursed through him. “Firestar’s a finer warrior than you ever were.”

“Don’t forget that he’s not your kin, either,”

Tigerstar hissed softly. “There’s no point defending him now.”

Lionblaze stared at the dusk-lit warrior. Does he know who my real father is? “You knew al along that I wasn’t Firestar’s kin,” he growled. “You let me believe a lie!”

Tigerstar twitched one ear. “So?”

Rage and frustration overwhelmed Lionblaze.

Leaping into the air, he threw himself at Tigerstar and tried to push him over. He battered at the tabby warrior’s head and shoulders, his claws unsheathed,

tearing out huge clumps of fur. But the red haze of fury that fil ed his head made him clumsy, unfocused.



His blows landed at random, barely scratching

Tigerstar’s skin.

The huge tabby tom went limp, letting himself drop

to one side and hooking one paw around

Lionblaze’s leg to unbalance him. Lionblaze landed

among the bracken with a jolt that drove the breath

from his body. A heartbeat later he felt a huge paw

clamp down on his shoulders, pinning him to the ground.

“I’ve taught you better than that, little warrior,”

Tigerstar taunted him. “You’re out of practice.”

Taking a deep breath, Lionblaze heaved himself upward. Tigerstar leaped back and crouched a fox-length away, his amber eyes burning.

“I’l show you who’s out of practice,” Lionblaze panted.

He forced his anger down, summoning a cold

determination—al the fighting moves he had ever learned were at the tips of his claws. When Tigerstar sprang at him, he was prepared; he dived forward and hurled himself underneath his opponent’s bel y.

As soon as Tigerstar’s paws hit the ground,

Lionblaze whipped around and landed a couple of blows on the tabby tom’s hindquarters before



blows on the tabby tom’s hindquarters before

leaping out of range.

Tigerstar spun to face him. “Better,” he meowed,

mockery stil in his voice. “I have mentored you wel .”

Before Lionblaze could reply, the huge tabby

darted toward him, veering aside at the last moment

and lashing out with one forepaw as he passed.

Lionblaze felt Tigerstar’s claws rake along his side, and blood begin trickling out of the scratches. Fear stabbed at him. What happens if he kills me here?

Will I be really dead?

His mind cleared. Tigerstar was hurtling toward him again. Lionblaze scrambled aside; he aimed a

blow, but felt his claws slide harmlessly through the tabby’s pelt.

“Too slow,” Tigerstar spat. “You’l have to work harder, now you know that prophecy wasn’t meant for you. That was for Firestar’s kin, wasn’t it?”

Lionblaze knew that the tabby tom was trying to make him too angry to fight. I won’t listen! All I need to do is win this battle!

He sprang at Tigerstar again, twisting in the air as he had been taught during those long nighttime visits, and landed squarely on the massive tabby’s broad shoulders. Digging in with his claws, he stretched forward and sank his teeth into Tigerstar’s neck.

Tigerstar tried the same trick of going limp and pul ing Lionblaze down with him, but this time Lionblaze was ready. He wriggled out from

underneath the heavy body, battering with his hind paws at Tigerstar’s exposed stomach fur.

“I’m not fal ing for that trick twice!” he hissed.

Tigerstar struggled to get up, but blood was

pouring from a gash in his bel y; he stumbled down

again, rol ing onto his back. Lionblaze planted one forepaw on Tigerstar’s chest and held the other, claws extended, against his neck.

The tabby glared up at him; for a heartbeat, fear

flashed in his blazing amber eyes. “Do you real y think you could kil me?” he growled. “You’d never do it.”

“No.” Lionblaze sheathed his claws and stepped back. “You’re already dead.”

He turned and stalked away, his pelt stil bristling and al his senses alert in case Tigerstar fol owed and leaped on him again. But there was no sound from the dark warrior, and soon he was left behind among the endless trees.

Lionblaze’s mind whirled. He had beaten

Tigerstar! Maybe I do have power after all…but how

can I, if I’m not one of the Three?

He paused, scarcely seeing the tangling

undergrowth and the trees of the dark forest al around him. Do I want to know who my parents really

are? he wondered. Does it even matter? Maybe it was best to let his Clanmates accept him for who they thought he was, so he could go on striving to improve his fighting skil s.

I’m already the best fighter in ThunderClan. I know I can be a great warrior.

“Ashfur is dead,” he meowed out loud. “And

Squirrelflight won’t reveal her secret to any other cats. It would hurt her Clanmates far too much if they knew she’d been lying to them for so long. Why not

let everything stay the same?”





Lionblaze woke to the sun on his face. Most of the

cats had already left the den; Lionblaze spotted only the gray-and-white pelt of Mousewhisker, who had kept guard over the camp the night before.

Lionblaze’s jaws stretched in a yawn. “Thank

StarClan I wasn’t on the dawn patrol,” he muttered.

When he tried to get up, every muscle in his body

shrieked a protest; he felt as if his body was one huge ache, from his head to his paws. Down one side, his golden tabby fur was matted with blood.

I hope no cat has noticed that! he thought as he

bent his head and began cleaning up his pelt with swift, rhythmic licks.

The fight with Tigerstar had been a dream, hadn’t



it? Lionblaze didn’t understand why he should feel just as much pain and exhaustion as if it had real y happened. And he had been cut, as if a living warrior had raked his claws across Lionblaze’s flank…. He

tried not to think about it. It doesn’t matter, because I’ll never go back to that place, he told himself. It’s over.

He felt better after his grooming, with his fur fluffed up to hide the gash in his side. When he finished, he could hear the voices of several cats just outside the den, though not close enough for him to make out what they were saying. Curious, he rose to his paws, arched his back in a delicious stretch, and pushed his way through the branches into the clearing.

Thornclaw was standing a couple of fox-lengths away; Spiderleg sat close by, while Cloudtail paced

up and down in front of them, the tip of his white tail twitching. Cloudtail’s mate, Brightheart, watched him anxiously from where she sat with Ferncloud,

Brackenfur, and Sorreltail. Honeyfern and Berrynose

were crouched nearby, their eyes fixed on

Thornclaw.

“Ashfur was kil ed by a WindClan cat!” the golden

brown tom was declaring. “It’s the only possible answer.”

A few of his listeners nodded in agreement,

though Lionblaze saw others exchanging doubtful glances.

“Firestar said he thought that one of us did it,”

Honeyfern mewed, sounding nervous to be

contradicting a senior warrior.

“Clan leaders have made mistakes before,”

Cloudtail meowed. “Firestar isn’t always right.”

“I’m sure none of us would kil Ashfur,” Ferncloud

added more gently. “Why would we want to? Ashfur

had no enemies!”

I wish that was true, Lionblaze thought.

However much he tried to forget, that night of fire

and storm was seared into Lionblaze’s memory. He

could hear the roar of the flames on the cliff top, and could see them licking hungrily around him and his littermates as Ashfur blocked the end of the branch

they

needed

to

scramble

toward

safety.

Squirrelflight’s confession rang in his ears again: She had told Ashfur that Lionblaze, Hol yleaf, and Jayfeather were not her kits. It was the only way to save their lives, by pretending she did not care what happened to them, but she had handed Ashfur a weapon more terrible than any flaming branch.

Lionblaze knew that the gray warrior would have announced the truth to al the Clans at the Gathering; only death had closed his jaws forever and kept the

secret safe.

“Lionblaze! Hey, Lionblaze, are you deaf?”

Lionblaze dragged his thoughts back to the hol ow

to see Spiderleg waving him over with his tail.

“You were Ashfur’s last apprentice,” the black warrior prompted as Lionblaze padded reluctantly up

to the group. “Do you know if he’d quarreled with any cat?”

“Especial y any WindClan cat?” Thornclaw added,

with a meaningful twitch of his whiskers.

Lionblaze shook his head. “Uh…no,” he replied

awkwardly. He couldn’t lie and say that Ashfur had quarreled with a WindClan cat, even though he wished with every hair on his pelt that it was true.

Letting his Clanmates believe such a thing could cause an al -out war between ThunderClan and

WindClan. “I hadn’t seen much of Ashfur just before

he died,” he added.

To his relief, no other cats questioned him.

“We’d know if Ashfur quarreled with a



“We’d know if Ashfur quarreled with a

ThunderClan

cat,”

Brackenfur

insisted.

“It’s

impossible to keep a secret around here.”

If only you knew! Lionblaze thought.

“Brackenfur’s right.” Sorreltail touched her nose to her mate’s ear. “But al the same, we can’t be sure

that a WindClan cat—”

“Ashfur died on the WindClan border,” Spiderleg

interrupted. “What more do you want?”

Sorreltail turned to face him, her neck fur bristling at his scathing tone. “I want a bit more evidence than where his body was found before I start blaming any

cat.”

Honeyfern and Brackenfur murmured agreement,

but Lionblaze could see that most of the cats were convinced that a WindClan warrior was responsible

for Ashfur’s death. However much he worried about

what that could lead to, he couldn’t bury a guilty sense of relief.

“Are we going to let WindClan get away with

this?” Thornclaw demanded, his ears lying flat as he dug his claws into the earth.

“No!” Berrynose leaped to his paws. “We have to

show them they can’t mess with ThunderClan.”



Lionblaze’s bel y churned as he saw the warriors

cluster more closely around Thornclaw. They were behaving as if the golden brown tom was their leader, and seemed ready to fol ow him into battle to avenge their Clanmate’s murder.

“It would be best to attack by night,” Thornclaw began. “There’l be enough moonlight to see by, and

they won’t be expecting trouble.”

“We’l see they get it, though.” Spiderleg lashed his tail.

“We’l head for the WindClan camp,” Thornclaw

continued. “It’l be best to split up: One raiding party can attack from this direction—”

“What?” The low growl came from just behind

Lionblaze.

Startled, Lionblaze glanced over his shoulder to see Brambleclaw; he, along with al the other cats, had been so intent on what Thornclaw was planning

that he hadn’t heard the Clan deputy approach.

“We’re going to raid WindClan,” Spiderleg

explained, bunching his muscles as if he was

planning to launch himself out of the camp right away. “One of them kil ed Ashfur, and—”

“There wil be no raid on WindClan,” Brambleclaw



interrupted, a glow of anger springing up in his amber eyes. “There is no evidence that a WindClan

cat kil ed Ashfur.”

Lionblaze gazed at the cat he had always

believed was his father. Does he know the truth? he

wondered, remembering al the times that

Brambleclaw had play wrestled with him and his littermates when they were kits, and how many times

he had helped them or advised them as they grew older. Squirrelflight had told Ashfur that Brambleclaw didn’t know the truth, but Lionblaze had no reason to trust her now. If he does know, he’s a very good liar.

As good as Squirrelflight.

Brambleclaw didn’t wait for a response. He

stalked off in the direction of the tumbled rocks that led up to the Highledge, only to halt after a couple of paces and glance back, twitching his ears to beckon

Lionblaze to him.

“Are you okay?” The deputy’s voice was ful of sympathy. “Ashfur was your mentor, after al .”

But we weren’t close. Lionblaze didn’t want to say

the words aloud, but he had always known there was

something wrong between himself and Ashfur; they had never known the true bond between a mentor and apprentice. Had Ashfur hated him the same way

he had hated Squirrelflight? What a waste: Lionblaze wasn’t even Squirrelflight’s son.

“I’m fine,” he mumbled.

Brambleclaw rested his tail-tip on Lionblaze’s

shoulder. “I can see you’re not,” he mewed. “Is there anything you want to tel me? You know you can always come and talk to me.”

For a couple of heartbeats Lionblaze froze. Does

Brambleclaw suspect me of killing Ashfur?

“It’s hard to lose a cat you were close to,”

Brambleclaw went on. “But I promised you before, his death wil not go unavenged.”

He unsheathed his long, curved claws and sank them into the floor of the hol ow. Lionblaze flinched, imagining those claws tearing into the throat of the guilty cat….

“If I find the cat who did this,” Brambleclaw growled softly, “they wil regret taking the life of a warrior and my Clanmate.”

He turned away, padding toward the Highledge,

but before he reached the foot of the rock fal , Firestar appeared from his den. He paused for a moment, looking down into the clearing; the pale sun moment, looking down into the clearing; the pale sun of leaf-bare touched his pelt, turning it to flame. Then he bounded lightly down the stones to join

Brambleclaw and Lionblaze. He nodded to the group

of cats surrounding Thornclaw.

“What’s happening?” he queried.

“Some of the Clan want to lead an attack on WindClan,” Brambleclaw reported. “I didn’t know we

had so many mouse-brains in ThunderClan.”

Firestar twitched his ears. “It’s hard to accept the death of a warrior,” he meowed loudly. “But this isn’t the time for an attack. I wil lead a patrol to speak with Onestar, to see if he knows anything.”

“Of course he knows!” Spiderleg had turned to face them, his neck fur bristling aggressively.

“We should attack now, before we lose more

warriors,” Thornclaw declared.

Firestar shook his head. “There’s no point in stirring up trouble when there’s no need,” he warned.

“But there is need.” Thornclaw padded forward

until he stood nose to nose with his Clan leader. “A warrior is dead!”

Yowls of agreement rose up from the cats around

him.



“Ashfur must be avenged!”

“He was a fine warrior!”

“The whole Clan respected him! No ThunderClan

cat would have kil ed him!”

Lionblaze couldn’t join in; it was hard enough to hide his fear and anxiety from his Clanmates. They remembered Ashfur as a brave and loyal warrior; they knew nothing of the cat who had been prepared

to destroy his Clan to take revenge on Squirrelflight for choosing Brambleclaw instead of him.

Firestar raised a paw for silence, but he was stil

waiting for the yowling to die down when Lionblaze spotted cats emerging into the camp from the thorn

tunnel: a hunting patrol led by Sandstorm. Dustpelt, Squirrelflight, and Hol yleaf fol owed her into the clearing and went to drop their prey on the fresh-kil pile before padding over to join the cats around Firestar.

“What’s al this?” Hol yleaf asked as she reached

Lionblaze’s side.

Lionblaze stared at Squirrelflight, at the agony in her face as she listened to her Clanmates’ praise of Ashfur. He knew that she must be sharing his own thoughts, of the darkness in the gray warrior that was so wel hidden from the rest of his Clan. How much

do you know about how he died? he asked himself,

not wanting to meet her gaze.

“Lionblaze, what’s happening?” Hol yleaf repeated

her question in a sharper tone, prodding him in the

side with one paw.

Lionblaze glanced at her. His sister’s green eyes

were haunted, and she looked as if she hadn’t slept

for a moon. She looks just like how I feel, he thought.

“Thornclaw and some of the others want to attack

WindClan because of Ashfur’s death,” he replied.

Hol yleaf’s eyes widened. “Do they real y think it was a WindClan cat?” she asked, a tinge of surprise

in her voice.

“Some of them do. But Firestar—”

Lionblaze broke off as the Clan leader darted back to the tumbled rocks and leaped up onto a boulder. “Let al cats old enough to catch their own prey join here beneath the Highledge for a Clan meeting!” he yowled.

The cats already in the clearing fol owed him and

settled themselves at the foot of the boulder.

Lionblaze could see that some of them were stil arguing among themselves, but they kept their

voices low.

The two apprentices, Foxpaw and Icepaw,

emerged from the elders’ den under the hazel bush,

pushing an enormous bal of moss between them.

Mousefur and Longtail fol owed them out and

crouched down in a patch of sunlight. Mousewhisker

pushed his way out of the warriors’ den, yawning and flicking bits of moss off his pelt.

Graystripe and Mil ie appeared from the nursery, with their kits tumbling around their paws. They were fol owed more slowly by Birchfal and Whitewing; the white she-cat was heavy with kits, and Birchfal kept close to her side. Daisy was the last to appear; she sat in the nursery entrance, giving her chest fur a thorough wash, while Toadkit and Rosekit rol ed around beside her, play fighting.

Leafpool and Jayfeather emerged from the

medicine cats’ den and stayed just outside the bramble screen, away from the rest of the Clan.

Lionblaze tried to catch his brother’s attention, but Jayfeather refused to respond, resolutely facing Firestar instead.

“I know you’re al wondering what to do about



“I know you’re al wondering what to do about Ashfur’s death,” the Clan leader began. “I promise you that the cat who kil ed him wil be punished. But there’s no proof that WindClan was involved.”

“There’s enough proof for me,” Spiderleg grunted.

Firestar ignored the interruption. “I wil lead a patrol to speak with Onestar. Not to accuse him or attack his Clan. Ashfur died on the WindClan border, and it’s possible that one of Onestar’s warriors saw something.”

There were murmurs of disagreement from some

of the listening cats; Thornclaw was flexing his claws in and out, but he didn’t speak up.

“Brambleclaw, you’l come with me,” Firestar went

on. “And Brackenfur, Sorreltail, and Lionblaze. We’l leave right away.”

Lionblaze felt a jolt in his bel y when Firestar spoke his name. For a heartbeat, he wanted to protest; he hated the thought of being involved in the investigation of Ashfur’s death. But he knew that if he said anything, he would only draw attention to himself. He had no reason to refuse to go to WindClan; as far as the other cats knew, he was as

shocked by Ashfur’s death, and as determined to get vengeance, as they were.

“Good,” Hol yleaf breathed into his ear. “And

you’ve got to tel me what happens when you get back.”

“Okay,” Lionblaze muttered. “But I’d rather stay out of it.”

Firestar leaped down from the boulder and

padded through the groups of cats with Brambleclaw

just behind him. Brackenfur and Sorreltail joined them.

Cats who didn’t want to attack WindClan,

Lionblaze realized.

Firestar isn’t taking any risks.

Firestar led them toward the thorn tunnel; before they left, he turned and summoned Graystripe with a

flick of his tail. “Keep an eye on Thornclaw and the others,” he murmured to the gray warrior. “Make sure they don’t try to launch their own attack.”

Graystripe nodded grimly. “Don’t worry. I’l stick closer than their pelts.”

Lionblaze and the others fol owed Firestar as he headed through the woods, making for the WindClan

border. Fal en leaves rustled as the cats brushed through them; in the shade of the trees, where the leaf-bare sun didn’t penetrate, every leaf was stil rimmed with frost. The bare branches traced

delicate patterns against the sky.

The patrol padded behind Firestar in solemn

silence; Lionblaze brought up the rear. He could tel that the rest of the cats were uneasy, halting every few paw steps to taste the air. Sorreltail spun around, her tail lashing, at the sound of an acorn dropping into the undergrowth.

“It doesn’t feel like our territory anymore,” she mewed disgustedly when she realized her mistake.

“There could be anything lurking about. Suppose it was a rogue who kil ed Ashfur?”

“It might have been.” Brackenfur touched his

mate’s shoulder with his tail-tip. “But you’re safe with us. One cat can’t take on a whole patrol.”

“That crow-food-eating menace Sol could stil be hanging around,” Sorreltail went on. “No cat knows where he went after ShadowClan threw him out.”

Firestar, who had paused to wait for his

Clanmates, pricked his ears with interest. “It’s an idea. We should al stay alert for any signs of him. I’l announce it to the rest of the Clan when we get back.”



“Sol doesn’t strike me as the sort of cat who would kil ,” Brambleclaw commented thoughtful y.

“Getting other cats to do his dirty work is more his style.”

Firestar nodded. “True. But maybe Ashfur caught

him trying to do something to harm ThunderClan.”

“Ashfur might have attacked Sol just for being on

our territory,” Brackenfur meowed. “He would have taken on a badger to protect his Clan.”

“He was a loyal warrior,” Brambleclaw agreed.

Miserably Lionblaze wished he could feel what

they did, and mourn his Clanmate sincerely. Ashfur’s famous loyalty wouldn’t have stopped him from

ruining ThunderClan’s reputation by revealing

Squirrelflight’s secret at the Gathering. He had confessed that he had plotted with Hawkfrost to make Brambleclaw kil Firestar. His obsession with

Squirrelflight had destroyed his commitment to

ThunderClan. But now that he was dead, his Clan was determined to make him into a hero. Lionblaze

longed to yowl out the truth to every cat in the forest, but he knew the destruction that would fol ow. When

the patrol set off again, he could only plod along at the rear, hating the need for silence and hating the rear, hating the need for silence and hating himself.

“Are you okay?” Brambleclaw had dropped back

to pad beside him. “I know you must be missing Ashfur.”

Fury at Brambleclaw’s misunderstanding flooded

through Lionblaze. “I’m fine!” he snapped, knowing he was being il ogical. “Stay out of my fur, wil you?”

Brambleclaw’s eyes widened, but he said nothing,

just nodded and quickened his pace again to catch

up with Firestar.

“You shouldn’t claw his whiskers off,” Sorreltail mewed, padding up to Lionblaze and touching his ear with her nose. “Brambleclaw is bound to be worried about you; that’s what fathers do.” Her amber eyes gleamed with affection. “My kits are warriors now, but they’l always be my kits.”

Lionblaze gave her an awkward nod, but he

couldn’t reply. His secret trapped him like rising floodwater, cutting him off from every cat in his Clan.

He’s not my father! Lionblaze wanted to yowl.

Everything you’ve been told is a lie!





CHAPTER 2




A chilly wind was blowing from the moor when Firestar and his patrol reached the stream that marked the border with WindClan. Lionblaze’s paws

tingled as he padded up to the edge of the bank.



This was close to where they had found Ashfur. He

tried to shut out the memories of Ashfur’s slick gray body, wedged behind a rock and bobbing in the current. Yet he could not regret Ashfur’s death.

Each cat leaped across the stream and raced into

WindClan territory without even checking for scent.

Lionblaze guessed that they, too, were spooked by

the memory of the dead warrior. Firestar led them on, stil at a run, until the stream was hidden behind them by rocks and reeds.

Lionblaze tasted the air and shivered. There was

a tang of snow that must have come from the mountains. A dark haze like storm clouds crouched

on the horizon; Lionblaze knew he was looking at the distant home of the Tribe of Rushing Water. How are they managing? he wondered. Leaf-bare would be

even harder where snow lay thick on bare rock and

prey was scarce. But I wish I could go back, he added to himself, knowing he meant not just back to

the mountains, but back in time as wel . When I was

with the Tribe, I knew who I was and where my destiny was leading.

“There are WindClan cats nearby,” Firestar

meowed.



Lionblaze jumped guiltily; thinking about the Tribe, he had never noticed the WindClan scent, though it

was strong and fresh. For the first time he started to wonder how their mission would turn out. There was

stil hostility between ThunderClan and WindClan; Onestar was bound to see an accusation behind Firestar’s questions.

The ThunderClan leader headed across the moor

toward the WindClan camp with his warriors at his flanks. Wind buffeted their fur, and a strong gust nearly carried Sorreltail off her paws.

“I can’t imagine why cats would choose to live here!” she hissed as she struggled to regain her balance.

“We like it here!” A loud meow rang out across the

moorland.

Lionblaze looked up to see a WindClan patrol

appearing over the shoulder of the hil . Tornear, the cat who had spoken, was in the lead, fol owed by Crowfeather, Whitetail, and Heathertail.

Meeting Heathertail’s gaze, Lionblaze saw

nothing but cold contempt in the eyes of the cat who had once been his friend—and even more than that.

Bitter regret surged through him. As he looked back, those times had been the happiest and easiest of his life, even though he had broken the warrior code to meet Heathertail in the tunnels beneath the forest.

Now she looked as if she would have kil ed him for a couple of mousetails; Lionblaze shuddered as he pictured his own body lying in the stream.

“Greetings, Tornear.” Firestar dipped his head as

the WindClan patrol approached.

“What are you doing here?” Tornear sounded

wary but not hostile, though Crowfeather’s neck fur was bristling and Whitetail had unsheathed her claws.

“I need to speak with Onestar,” Firestar explained.

“May we visit your camp?”

Tornear hesitated, narrowing his eyes in

suspicion, then gave a brusque nod. “Very wel , but

we’l escort you. And you’d better not start anything.”

“We only want to talk,” Firestar promised.

Taking the lead, Tornear headed farther up the hil

in the direction of the WindClan camp. Crowfeather

and Whitetail flanked the ThunderClan patrol on either side, while Heathertail brought up the rear.

Lionblaze was acutely conscious of her, padding just behind him, and felt her gaze pierce him like a thorn.



behind him, and felt her gaze pierce him like a thorn.

At last Tornear led them up the long slope toward

the circle of gorse bushes that surrounded the WindClan camp. Pushing through the thorns,

Lionblaze paused to look down. It was a bleak place: a wide hol ow of rough moorland grass where stones

poked up through the thin soil. Twisted thornbushes

gave the only shelter, except for the disused badgers’ set that was now the elders’ den.

Lionblaze spotted Onestar sitting near the middle

of the hol ow, talking to Barkface, the WindClan medicine cat. A few other WindClan cats—including

the deputy, Ashfoot, and Crowfeather’s son,

Breezepelt—stood around listening.

Lionblaze’s paws pricked with curiosity as he

recognized the urgency in Barkface’s stance and expression; Lionblaze couldn’t hear what he was saying, but it looked as though he was sharing grave news with his Clan leader.

What’s all that about? Lionblaze wondered. They

can’t know anything about Ashfur!

Onestar glanced up as Tornear raced down the

slope to announce the visitors. Seeing Firestar and

the others, he hesitated for a few heartbeats, then spoke quickly to Barkface. The medicine cat

nodded, and at last Onestar signaled with his tail to let Firestar bring his warriors down into the camp.

“Greetings, Onestar.” Firestar halted in front of the WindClan leader and bowed his head. “Thank you for al owing us to talk to you.”

The look Onestar gave to Firestar showed none of

their old friendship. “Say what you have to say,” he mewed cautiously.

His edgy tone made Lionblaze wonder if al was wel in WindClan. Maybe there’s something he

doesn’t want us to know about. Glancing around, he

saw that al the WindClan cats looked skinny and underfed, but that was just as usual for WindClan.

“I’d like to speak to you in private,” Firestar began.

Onestar’s neck fur rose and he shook his head.

“Anything you have to say can be said in front of my Clanmates.”

While he was speaking, Ashfoot padded up and

stood by her leader’s side. She said nothing, just surveyed the ThunderClan cats with calm, clear eyes.

“Wel ?” Onestar prompted.

“If that’s how you want it.” Lionblaze’s bel y churned as Firestar continued: “On the night of the Gathering, we found Ashfur’s body in the stream that marks our border. There was a gash in his throat; we think a cat kil ed him.”

Instantly the WindClan warriors began to bristle, and Breezepelt let out an indignant yowl.

Onestar lashed his tail and dug his claws hard into

the ground. His eyes blazed with anger. “How dare you assume we had anything to do with it?” he hissed. “We have nothing to gain from kil ing one of your warriors.”

“None of us had any quarrel with Ashfur,” Whitetail

put in.

“This Clan is loyal to the warrior code,”

Crowfeather growled, his lip curling in a snarl.

Lionblaze braced himself, ready for the fight he was sure would break out at any moment. But

Firestar remained calm; not even his tail-tip twitched.

“No cat is accusing you,” he insisted. “We came to ask if you saw anything on the border that night.”

“What, like one of my warriors kil ing Ashfur?”

Onestar’s fur was stil fluffed up with anger. “Look to your own Clanmates first, Firestar. Question their loyalty to the warrior code, not ours.”



Lionblaze felt the fur rising on his neck and shoulders; Brackenfur and Sorreltail were bristling, too, while Brambleclaw flexed his claws in and out at the veiled insult. So what if there are cats of mixed blood in ThunderClan? Lionblaze thought fiercely.

We’re all loyal. He pictured Ashfur’s body again, soaked and limp. All except one.

He spotted Heathertail standing off to one side, her gaze fixed on him. She seemed to be daring him

to strike out so that she would have an excuse to jump on him and sink her claws into his fur.

Breezepelt had padded so close to her that their pelts were brushing, and he met Lionblaze’s stare with a chal enge in his eyes. Heathertail is mine now, he seemed to be saying.

You’re welcome to her, Lionblaze glared back.

“Then you saw nothing?” Firestar pressed; his

voice had hardened, insisting on an answer.

“Nothing.” Onestar spat out the word like a piece

of crow-food. “Now get out of our territory. Ashfoot, take a couple of warriors and escort them to the border.”

His deputy gave him a brisk nod and waved her tail to beckon Tornear and Breezepelt, who padded



tail to beckon Tornear and Breezepelt, who padded

up to the ThunderClan patrol with truculent stares.

Firestar dipped his head toward the WindClan

leader. “Thank you, Onestar. If you learn anything more, wil you please send us a message?”

Onestar didn’t reply. Fol owing Firestar’s lead, Lionblaze tried to stay dignified as he and the others were herded up the side of the hol ow and through the barrier of gorse bushes onto the open moor.

None of the WindClan cats spoke as they

conducted Firestar’s patrol back to the border.

Ashfoot set a brisk pace, but Lionblaze would have

liked to go racing ahead, to return to the woods, away from the cold eyes of these hostile cats. Yet there was no safety in the woods, either—nowhere he could hide from the death of Ashfur and al it meant for his Clan.

On the hil side above the stream, Ashfoot halted.

“You can go back to the camp,” she ordered

Breezepelt and Tornear. “I’l see them the rest of the way.”

“Why?” Breezepelt demanded.

“You’re needed for a hunting patrol,” the WindClan

deputy replied. “Or do you think the rabbits wil come running into the camp on their own?”

Breezepelt let out an annoyed hiss, and Tornear looked uneasy, stopping once to glance back as both cats climbed to the top of the hil and vanished over it in the direction of the camp.

Ashfoot silently watched until they were out of sight, then turned to Firestar with a sigh. “I wanted to talk to you alone, Firestar. There’s something I have to tel you.”

Lionblaze’s bel y lurched. Had Ashfoot been by the stream that night? Could she put a name to the

cat whose teeth had torn out Ashfur’s life? But the WindClan deputy looked too calm for a cat who had

been a witness to murder.

“Go on,” Firestar meowed.

“A few sunrises ago,” Ashfoot continued, “I was leading the dawn patrol along the stream when I spotted Sol—you remember, the cat who took over

ShadowClan for a while?”

“Sol?” Firestar’s green eyes stretched wide. “I thought he had left the lake.”

“No—or at least, he was here a few days ago.”

“Then why didn’t Onestar tel me about him?”

Firestar’s shock was giving way to anger.



Ashfoot

shrugged,

looking

uncomfortable.

Lionblaze knew that she was a fair-minded cat; she

couldn’t be happy about the tensions between her own Clan and ThunderClan. But her loyalty to

Onestar wouldn’t let her speak openly.

“Ashfur’s death is your problem, not ours,” she pointed out. “You can’t expect Onestar to be happy

when you come barging into his camp accusing his

cats of murder.”

“We didn’t—” Brambleclaw began indignantly, his

amber eyes blazing.

Firestar raised his tail for silence. “Let’s end this misunderstanding now,” he meowed to Ashfoot. “We

are not accusing WindClan of anything. We just want

to find out anything we can about Ashfur’s death.

Now tel us what you know about Sol. Where did you

see him? When?”

“It was about a quarter moon ago,” Ashfoot

replied. “He was near the lake, in the woods on your side of the stream. I don’t think he saw us; he was too busy eating some fresh-kil .”

“Prey-stealing!” Sorreltail hissed.

“That’s not the day Ashfur died,” Brackenfur

murmured thoughtful y. “But it’s close to the place where we found his body.”

“Very close,” Firestar agreed. “Thank you,

Ashfoot. That’s the most useful thing we’ve learned so far.”

Ashfoot dipped her head. “I’m glad to be of help. I

wish you and your Clan wel , Firestar.”

Lionblaze could see the sympathy in her eyes.

She can tell we’re in trouble, he realized. If only she knew how much!





Sunhigh was past and long black shadows were

beginning to creep across the hol ow when Firestar’s patrol returned. The queens and Birchfal were drowsily sharing tongues outside the nursery, while Cloudtail, Brightheart, and Hazeltail were crouched beside the fresh-kil pile. Foxpaw and Icepaw were practicing fighting moves outside their den.

Lionblaze heard Icepaw screech, “WindClan

murderer! I’l rip your pelt off!”

Firestar sighed. “We’d better put a stop to that. I’l cal another meeting right away.”



Brambleclaw’s whiskers twitched in surprise.

“Shouldn’t we discuss it with the senior warriors first?”

Firestar shook his head. “No. The whole Clan is involved in this. I want them to know about Sol right now, before some of these hotheads manage to

sneak off and attack WindClan.”

He bounded across the clearing toward the

tumbled rocks, but before he reached them Hazeltail

spotted the returning warriors and leaped to her paws. “Hey!” she yowled. “Firestar’s back!”

Heads popped out from between the branches of

the warriors’ den. The queens sat up and pricked up

their ears, while al five kits tumbled out of the nursery, tripping over one another’s paws.

Jayfeather poked his head out from behind the bramble screen, a bundle of herbs in his jaws. By the time Firestar reached the Highledge, there was no need for him to summon the Clan; every cat in the camp had gathered to hear what WindClan had to say. Lionblaze, with Brambleclaw and the rest of the patrol, padded over to sit at the back of the crowd.

“What did you find out?” Thornclaw cal ed from where he sat at the foot of the tumbled rocks. “When do we attack?”

“We don’t,” Firestar replied. “WindClan did not murder Ashfur.”

An uneasy muttering spread among the cats, but

Firestar didn’t wait for an argument to break out.

Quickly he went on: “Onestar and his warriors knew

nothing about Ashfur’s death until I told them. And Ashfoot gave me one very useful piece of

information: She saw Sol a few sunrises ago, by the

stream near the lake.”

Spiderleg shot upright, his tail waving. “That’s where Ashfur’s body was found!”

Yowls of shock and anger broke out; several cats

leaped up, eyes blazing and fur bristling, as if they wanted to attack the rogue cat right away.

“Sol kil ed Ashfur!”

“Filthy murderer!”

“We should find him and teach him what happens

when rogues attack a warrior!”

Firestar raised his tail for silence. “We stil have no proof,” he went on when he could make himself heard. “But—”

“What proof do we need?” Mousefur rasped.

“Look at what he did to ShadowClan!”



“He didn’t kil any ShadowClan cats,” Dustpelt reminded her. “What reason would he have for kil ing Ashfur?”

Mousefur let out a disgusted hiss. “I wouldn’t put anything past that mangy piece of crow-food.”

“But he must have had a reason,” Brackenfur

meowed, backing up Dustpelt. “Not many cats kil just for fun.”

Lionblaze recal ed the stories he had heard about

Scourge, the leader of BloodClan who had tried to take over in the old forest. He sounded like a cat who had enjoyed kil ing. But Lionblaze didn’t think Sol was like that.

“Maybe Ashfur caught Sol on our territory,”

Brightheart suggested. “They could have fought—”

“But Ashfur hadn’t been fighting,” Sandstorm

interrupted. “There were no wounds on him except for the marks on his throat. Isn’t that right, Leafpool?”

Heads turned to look at the medicine cat, who was sitting outside her den, away from the crowd around the Highledge. She replied to Sandstorm with a curt nod, but said nothing.

“Wel , then,” Cloudtail meowed, “maybe Sol

caught Ashfur unawares, and took the chance to stir



caught Ashfur unawares, and took the chance to stir

up trouble between ThunderClan and WindClan.”

“That sounds like Sol,” Squirrelflight agreed with a flick of her tail. “Set cat against cat, and then step in to seize power for himself.”

“I think we need to know more,” Graystripe mewed

quietly. “It’s useful to know that Ashfoot spotted Sol, but that doesn’t set Sol’s teeth in Ashfur’s neck.”

“You’re right.” Firestar nodded toward his former deputy. “Can any cat tel us more about Sol?”

To Lionblaze’s surprise, Hol yleaf tentatively

raised her tail. “I…I saw him, Firestar. By the lake, not long after he was driven out of ShadowClan.”

She never told me about that! Uneasiness stirred

in Lionblaze’s bel y. But he and Jayfeather hadn’t told their sister about the catmint they had fetched from WindClan, either. When did we start keeping secrets from one another?

“Tel us what happened,” Firestar prompted.

“Nothing much,” Hol yleaf replied. “He said the Clans needed him, and he promised he’d be back.”

Cloudtail lashed his tail. “That’s a threat, if ever I heard one!”

“Why didn’t you report this?” Firestar asked



Hol yleaf.

Hol yleaf ducked her head. “I didn’t think it mattered,” she told him. “I thought it was just talk because he was angry about losing control of

ShadowClan. And he was heading along the

lakeshore toward WindClan territory. I thought he was leaving.”

“You stil should have mentioned it,” Firestar told her, though his voice was mild. “I could have told the patrols to keep a lookout for him.”

Hol yleaf studied her paws. “I’m sorry, Firestar.”

“Is there anything else we ought to know?” the Clan leader asked.

“I—I’m not sure,” Hol yleaf meowed hesitantly. “Sol

mentioned that he had met Midnight the badger, but I can’t see what that has to do with kil ing Ashfur.”

“It might tel us how to find him,” Brambleclaw pointed out. “If Sol knows Midnight, he might have come from the sun-drown-place!” The Clan deputy’s

eyes were glowing; Lionblaze could tel that he was

remembering his heroic journey from the old forest to find the badger who would tel the Clans where they

would live from now on.

“So what are we going to do?” Dustpelt asked Firestar.

“Why are you even asking?” Thornclaw growled.

“We go and deal with Sol, of course!”

Lionblaze remembered how certain Thornclaw

had been that morning that a WindClan cat had murdered the gray warrior. It hadn’t taken much to change his mind. But at least no cat was suggesting

that a ThunderClan cat was the kil er anymore.

They’re glad to accuse Sol because he’s a

rogue, he realized.

“We can’t be sure that Sol kil ed Ashfur,” Firestar

meowed over the chorus of agreement that met

Thornclaw’s words. “But we need to find out. We’l send a patrol to the sun-drown-place, to get Sol and bring him back here. Then we can question him, and

if he did kil Ashfur, he’l be punished.”

Prickles ran up and down Lionblaze’s spine at the

thought of confronting Sol. He didn’t know whether he wanted to go on the patrol or not. The rogue cat

knew more than was natural—more about him than any other cat had ever seemed to know; maybe the

answers to Firestar’s questions would be things no cat wanted to hear.

“Brambleclaw, you know the way to the sun-



drown-place,” Firestar announced. “You’l lead the patrol. Brackenfur, Hazeltail, and Birchfal can go with you.”

Lionblaze spotted Birchfal giving Whitewing a

regretful look and leaning over to lick her ear. He guessed that Birchfal didn’t want to leave his mate when she was so close to giving birth to her kits.

“This could be dangerous,” Brambleclaw meowed

to Firestar. “It might be better to have one or two more cats.”

“True.” The Clan leader glanced around.

“Lionblaze and Hol yleaf, then. You can leave at dawn.”

Lionblaze glanced at his sister; Hol yleaf’s neck fur was standing on end and her green eyes

glittered, but whether it was from fear or excitement, he couldn’t tel .

Hazeltail leaped to her paws and padded across

to Hol yleaf. “Isn’t this great?” she mewed. “We’re real y going to do something to help our Clan.”

Hol yleaf flicked her ears; Lionblaze couldn’t hear

what she said in reply. The rest of the Clan were crowding around the chosen cats, congratulating them and offering advice. Every other cat seemed them and offering advice. Every other cat seemed fired up to track down and destroy a murderer; he was the only one reluctant to avenge Ashfur’s death.

A few moments before, he had been relieved that

suspicion had moved away from ThunderClan. But laying the blame at Sol’s paws was no better. He didn’t want to be reminded of the Clan cats’

instinctive mistrust of outsiders, of cats who weren’t Clanborn.

What if I’m a rogue, too? Will they all turn against me?





CHAPTER 3





Jayfeather sat still while the rest of the Clan swirled around him, buzzing with tension and excitement.

“I’m scared.” Jayfeather recognized Bumblekit’s

voice close by. “What if Sol comes into the camp and gets us?”

Jayfeather heard the rasp of a tongue, and

pictured Mil ie giving her son a comforting lick. “Sol is far away, little one,” she murmured.

“And there are big, strong warriors here to guard

us,” Daisy added. “Do you think that your father would let any cat lay a claw on you?”

Bumblekit’s tone brightened. “No! Graystripe is the best!”

Jayfeather wished he could be reassured as

easily as the kit. He knew bad times were coming.

Fear, suspicion, and accusation crashed over him from al sides, as if his Clanmates were hurling rocks at him. He felt sick and dizzy, and the ground under his paws didn’t seem solid anymore.

Beside him, he heard Mousefur heaving herself to

her paws with a gusty sigh. “If Ashfur’s kil er meant to stir up trouble, mission accomplished. That cat has stuck a nose into a nest of bees by taking one of our warriors.”

And that cat will get stung. But Jayfeather didn’t want to think about what might happen to Ashfur’s murderer.

He picked out Lionblaze from the mingled scents

of ThunderClan cats, but his brother didn’t slow down as he padded past.

“So you’re going to find Sol,” Jayfeather cal ed to

him.

Lionblaze halted. “Yes.”

Jayfeather was desperate to talk to his brother as

they always did: easily, with nothing left unspoken.

But the secret they had shared since the night of the storm made it impossible.

The awkward silence was broken by Hol yleaf

padding up to them.

“You never told us you’d seen Sol,” Jayfeather meowed.

He could imagine his sister’s shrug. “It didn’t matter then.”

“Even so, you should have said something.”

Lionblaze sounded upset. “You know Sol was

supposed to help us with the prophecy.”

“What prophecy?” Hol yleaf snapped. “There isn’t

a prophecy, as far as we’re concerned.”

“You didn’t know that when you saw Sol.”



Jayfeather winced as he listened to them bicker.

There was no point to their argument, except that it stopped them from discussing the only thing that mattered: whether any of them believed that Sol had

kil ed Ashfur.

I’m glad I’m not going, he told himself. I don’t want to listen to them all the way to the sun-drown-place and back!

Leafpool’s voice cut across his thoughts.

“Jayfeather, there you are! I want you to come help me prepare herbs for the patrol.”

“Okay, coming.”

He rose to his paws and fol owed his mentor back

to the medicine cats’ den, leaving Hol yleaf and Lionblaze to their squabbling. As soon as he

brushed past the bramble screen, his mouth fil ed with the scent of the traveling herbs.

“I’ve laid everything out,” Leafpool told him. “We just have to make them into leaf wraps.”

It was a relief to have something to distract him, but the task was soon done, and he emerged into the clearing again with a leaf wrap for Brambleclaw

clamped between his jaws. By now the excitement over the patrol was beginning to die down, and the



over the patrol was beginning to die down, and the

cats were returning to their dens. Distinguishing Brambleclaw’s scent from the tang of the herbs he carried was difficult, but Jayfeather final y located him with Squirrelflight near the fresh-kil pile.

“I wish you were coming with us,” Brambleclaw was mewing to his mate as Jayfeather padded up.

“We have so many good memories from that

journey.”

Jayfeather caught the wistful note in his voice. It was as if the Clan deputy was looking back to a good time that was over, and regretting everything that had gone wrong since.

I wonder if he knows how wrong?

“I wish I was coming, too,” Squirrelflight replied, her voice subdued. “But I’m probably not fit enough

for a long journey, after the wound I took in the battle.”

“There’s no need to worry about Sol, you know,”

Brambleclaw reassured her. “I’l keep you safe.”

“I know.” Squirrelflight sighed.

Jayfeather’s pelt prickled. Squirrelflight had never needed another cat to keep her safe! Once she would have clawed the ears off any cat who



suggested it. But now she sounded…broken; waves

of guilt and longing were coming from her, so strongly that Jayfeather almost felt sorry for her.

He brushed past her and set the wrap of herbs down at Brambleclaw’s paws. “Here,” he announced.

“Traveling herbs. Eat them al , and get plenty of rest before tomorrow.”

“Thanks, Jayfeather.”

“Hey, Brambleclaw!” Graystripe’s voice came

from across the clearing; Jayfeather heard his paw steps as he bounded up. “Firestar wants me to act

as deputy while you’re away. Can I have a word with

you about border patrols?”

“Sure.” Brambleclaw gulped the herbs down

quickly. “What do you want to know?”

“Wel , I think a few cats are stil worried about WindClan….”

The voices of the two toms faded as they padded

across the clearing. Jayfeather had turned back toward his den when Squirrelflight intercepted him.

“Jayfeather, I want to talk to you.”

“There’s nothing left to say,” Jayfeather snapped.

And I don’t want to hear anything you might have to

tell me. He veered around the cat he had thought was his mother and headed toward his den. He felt

hol ow, as if a vast emptiness had opened up inside

him. For so long he had depended on the prophecy

to tel him who he was and what his destiny would be; without it, was he going to be just a medicine cat for the rest of his life? And where’s the cat who gave birth to us? What happened to her?

Jayfeather hated feeling that he wasn’t in control anymore. Unsettled, he blundered into the brambles

that screened the medicine cats’ den. His paws tangled in a long tendril; thorns raked through his pelt and scratched his nose. He let out a startled yowl.

“Jayfeather!” Leafpool was instantly by his side.

“Keep stil . I’l get you out.”

“I’m fine,” Jayfeather growled. He’d never made a

mistake like that, not even when he was a kit! He tugged himself free of the brambles and felt a clump of fur tear out as he stumbled into the den.

“Are you al right?” Leafpool’s voice was anxious.

“Your nose is bleeding. I’l get some cobweb.”

“I said, I’m fine.” Jayfeather shrugged her away, giving one paw a swift lick and swiping it over his nose. The scratch stung, but he couldn’t stand being fussed over.



Why can’t she leave me alone? he thought

angrily as he stalked toward the store to get more herbs. She doesn’t have to worry about me. We’re

not even kin!





When he had delivered al the traveling herbs, Jayfeather found a few moments to snatch prey from

the fresh-kil pile. As he gulped down his vole, he heard Berrynose’s raised voice a couple of tail-lengths away.



“Wel , I don’t trust ShadowClan! After al that trouble with Sol, Blackstar would do anything to prove his Clan is stil strong.”

Dustpelt’s annoyed hiss fol owed immediately.

“Are you mouse-brained? Are you actual y

suggesting that a ShadowClan warrior trekked al the way across our territory to kil Ashfur?”

“It could happen,” Berrynose mumbled.

“And hedgehogs could fly,” Dustpelt retorted

scathingly.

Swal owing the last of his prey and swiping his tongue around his jaws, Jayfeather headed back to

the den. I’m sick of cats wondering who killed Ashfur!

But when he took tansy to Mil ie and Briarkit, who

were recovering from greencough, he couldn’t help overhearing Cloudtail, Brightheart, and Daisy, sitting close to the nursery entrance.

“Don’t worry about a thing, Daisy,” Cloudtail

assured the cream-colored she-cat. “Some of the warriors are leaving, but there are plenty of us left to protect you and the kits.”

“Graystripe said we can double the guard on the

camp,” Brightheart added.



“I know you’l al help.” Daisy stil sounded worried.

“But is it right to bring that murderous cat back here?”

Jayfeather didn’t want to listen to yet another discussion about Sol. Pushing his way through the brambles into the nursery, he found the kits

swarming like ants whose nest has been disturbed.

“Now you be the kil er!” Rosekit squealed, batting

Blossomkit on the ear with one paw. “And we’l al come and catch you!”

Blossomkit let out a screech of excitement;

Jayfeather almost tripped over the other kits as they bundled on top of her in a writhing heap.

“Stop that right now!” Mil ie’s voice was shocked.

“This isn’t fun. A brave ThunderClan warrior is dead.”

Ashfur was never this important when he was

alive, Jayfeather thought.

The kits calmed down a little as Jayfeather set down the tansy and left. On his way back to his den, he passed Firestar with Sandstorm, Graystripe, and

Brackenfur.

“We can’t assume the problems are over,”

Sandstorm was meowing. “If I were you, Firestar, I’d warn al cats to stay away from the WindClan border, except for patrols.”

“Right,” Graystripe agreed. “We don’t want to find

another warrior dead in the stream.”

Jayfeather stifled a sigh. What’s the point of patrols and guards? The killer is here.

A night breeze had sprung up when Jayfeather

padded over to the fresh-kil pile where Lionblaze and Hol yleaf were eating with the rest of the Sol patrol. Earlier in the day, he hadn’t known what to say to them, and it was no better now.

“Hi,” he meowed. “Ready for tomorrow?”

“As ready as we’l ever be,” Hol yleaf replied.

“It’s weird, going without you.” Lionblaze brushed

his muzzle against Jayfeather’s shoulder. “This wil be the first time we’ve ever been separated.”

Jayfeather nodded. He had even managed the

long journey to visit the Tribe in the mountains, but this time he had to stay behind. In spite of his earlier impatience with his littermates, it felt wrong to be split from them, especial y when he knew that the tendrils of the secret that bound them together could not be broken by any distance.

“Wel …I guess it’s good-bye,” he muttered.

“I guess,” Lionblaze meowed.



“I guess,” Lionblaze meowed.

Jayfeather touched his nose to his brother’s, and

then to Hol yleaf’s.

“Bye, Jayfeather,” she murmured.

There ought to be more to say, Jayfeather knew,

but tension quivered among the three of them like the strands of a spider’s web. In the end, he ducked his head, mumbled, “May StarClan light your path,”

and headed back to the medicine cats’ den.





Jayfeather opened his eyes to see bleak rocks stretching to either side of him and a plunging precipice just in front of his paws. Startled, he leaped back. Wind swept across the mountaintop, ruffling his fur. As he recovered from the first shock of finding himself here, he recognized the place where he had met Midnight the badger.

Looking up, Jayfeather saw the stars whirling

around the sky, so fast that they became blurred trails of light. He tried to dig his claws into the thin soil where he stood, terrified of fal ing upward into the gaping emptiness.

Then he heard the scrape of claws on rock.

Wrenching his gaze from the swirling stars, he whipped around to see the bulky body and white-striped head of Midnight.

“What do you want?” he demanded, trying not to sound as scared as he felt.

“Sol not kil Ashfur,” Midnight rumbled. “This you know. These cats chasing wild geese.” She

lumbered closer to Jayfeather, starlight glittering in her smal black eyes. “Truth must come out.”

“Why?” This time Jayfeather couldn’t stop his

voice from quivering.

Midnight’s words fel like stones into a deep pool.



“Anything else wil destroy your Clan forever.”

“But—” Jayfeather began to protest, but the wind

rose, whipping away Midnight’s words and his own,

and the badger’s looming form, until he felt that he and Midnight and the stars themselves were being swept into a vast whirlpool.

He seemed to hit the ground with a jolt, and opened his eyes in the darkness of his own den. The

air bore the scent of frost, and Jayfeather guessed that dawn was near.

Leafpool was shifting around in the bracken of her

nest close by. “It’s time for the patrol to leave,” she meowed. “Do you want to come say good-bye?”

Jayfeather had said his farewel s the night before,

but he scrambled out of his nest and fol owed his mentor into the clearing. Most of the Sol patrol were bunched together near the opening of the thorn tunnel along with Firestar, Graystripe, and

Squirrelflight.

A fox-length or so away, Jayfeather located

Birchfal and Whitewing; their mingled scents told him they were pressed close together.

“You take care of yourself and get plenty of rest,”

Birchfal told his mate. “Eat lots of fresh-kil , and tel Leafpool if you feel anything….”

“Shh,” Whitewing murmured lovingly. “I’l be fine.

I’m not the only cat who ever gave birth!”

Jayfeather padded past them and found himself

close to Squirrelflight, who was saying good-bye to Brambleclaw. Unlike Whitewing, she was keeping

her emotions firmly under control; Jayfeather couldn’t tel what she was feeling.

“Be careful at the sun-drown-place,” she warned the ThunderClan deputy. “Don’t get too close to the

edge of the cliffs. They might give way again.”

“I know. I don’t want to go for another swim.”

Brambleclaw was trying to sound cheerful, but

Jayfeather could tel that it was forced.

“Brambleclaw, just remind me about hunting

patrols,” Graystripe broke in. “The best places are by the old Twoleg nest and near the dead tree, right?”

“Right,” Brambleclaw replied. “Make sure the

patrols remember that if they’re hunting by the dead tree they’ve got to be careful not to cross the ShadowClan border.”

“You’l be fine, Graystripe,” Firestar assured the gray warrior. “You know the territory wel enough by now.”



now.”

The cats who were staying behind edged

backward as the patrol got ready to leave. A solemn

silence spread over them. Jayfeather was aware of

a sudden heightening of tension; no cats had ever set out on an expedition like this before.

“May StarClan light your path,” Firestar meowed.

“You are going to find the truth.”

No! The truth is here! Jayfeather clamped his jaws shut so that he didn’t yowl out loud. Midnight had told him what he already knew: Sol did not kil Ashfur. The patrol was heading toward danger for nothing. Why couldn’t his Clanmates see that they had to look among themselves to find the truth?

He wondered whether they would find Sol and

what would happen if they did. His paws tingled as

he thought about what Sol could tel them.

He knows about the prophecy….





CHAPTER 4





Frost lay thick on the ground as Brambleclaw’s patrol headed through the forest toward the lake. The cats trotted in silence through the silver bracken, their breath clouding around their muzzles. Above Hol yleaf’s head the sky was lightening to a pale dove-gray.

Hol yleaf felt as though her paws would freeze to the ground at every step. Icy claws seemed to rake

through her fur; the bitter cold numbed the tips of her ears.

She

felt

light-headed—ever

since

Squirrelflight’s revelation, she had found it hard to choke down even the smal est piece of fresh-kil . Al that kept her going was a burning need to find out what Sol knew.

Lionblaze trotted alongside her, grim-faced and strong, his amber gaze fixed on the forest ahead.

His presence comforted Hol yleaf, though she felt Jayfeather’s absence like the stab of a thorn.

Maybe it’s best that he stayed behind, she

thought. It’s not like he can look for Sol himself.

Brambleclaw led the way to the stream, and they

fol owed it downhil until they reached the edge of the lake, where the water was stil and shal ow, with a delicate covering of ice.



Are we mouse-brained, to set out on a long

journey in leaf-bare?

But in spite of the cold, tension within the patrol ebbed as they headed along the shore on the edge

of WindClan territory. Hazeltail dropped back to pad along beside Hol yleaf, her eyes shining.

“Isn’t this great?” She gave a little bounce, like an excited kit. “We’re going somewhere no cats have been before.”

“Actual y they have,” Hol yleaf pointed out, not wanting to listen to Hazeltail’s chatter. “Brambleclaw and Squirrelflight went to the sun-drown-place with the other cats chosen by StarClan.”

“That must have been so exciting!” Hazeltail

sighed. “Your mother and father have traveled farther than any cats, ever. They’re so adventurous!”

No, they’re just liars, Hol yleaf thought bitterly.

There was no sign of any WindClan cats as they

skirted the territory, but as they approached the horseplace Hol yleaf began to pick up a strong WindClan scent. Brambleclaw halted, raising his tail to tel his patrol to do the same. He stood with head raised, his jaws parted to taste the air.

Aware of the pelts bristling around her, Hol yleaf Aware of the pelts bristling around her, Hol yleaf realized how jumpy they al were. They weren’t doing anything to break the warrior code by keeping close

to the edge of the lake, but a single whiff of WindClan scent had them al unsheathing their

claws. Ashfur’s death has done this to us.

“Why should there be any trouble?” Hazeltail

asked, puzzled. “We’re al owed to walk beside the lake, aren’t we?”

Before Hol yleaf could respond, a gray she-cat appeared at the top of the bank and padded down

toward the patrol.

“Ashfoot!” Brambleclaw relaxed. “Greetings.”

“Greetings, Brambleclaw.” The WindClan deputy

dipped her head as she reached the group of

ThunderClan cats. “I wondered if you would go looking for Sol. That is why you’re here, isn’t it?”

Brambleclaw nodded. “Whether or not he kil ed

Ashfur, he has questions to answer.”

“Then I’ve something to show you,” Ashfoot

meowed. “Fol ow me.”

She led the way along the edge of the lake until they reached the Twoleg fence around the

horseplace; the mesh shone like a huge cobweb in



the strengthening daylight.

“There.” Ashfur flicked her ears toward a rough place on the mesh where a long, silky strand of reddish fur was caught.

Brambleclaw padded up to it and sniffed it, then turned to the patrol with his amber eyes wide. “Sol.”

Hol yleaf’s heart pounded harder in her chest. The

evidence of Sol’s presence brought his memory

back to her more strongly than ever. He had seemed

to know so much, had prophesied so much…and yet

he had turned out to be a traitor.

“Then he went this way!” Brackenfur exclaimed, his eyes gleaming. “We’re on the right track.”

“The scent’s stale,” Brambleclaw warned, “but not

that old. Sol certainly passed this place not many sunrises ago.”

Ashfoot took a pace back, toward her own

territory. “Good-bye, then, and good luck.”

“Thanks, Ashfoot,” Brambleclaw responded.

“You’ve helped us a lot—what made you do it?”

Ashfoot twitched her ears. “I want my own Clan to

be safe. Sol must be dealt with before he causes more trouble.” Without waiting for a reply, she padded back up the bank and disappeared over the



shoulder of the hil .

“Or else she wants us to stop blaming WindClan,”

Birchfal muttered as soon as she was out of earshot.

“That may be,” Brambleclaw mewed. “But we

don’t need to bother about that now. Al of you, get a good sniff of this fur, and fix the scent in your minds.

Then we can be on our way.”

Sliding under the Twoleg fence, he led the way across the field. The ground was hard as stone, and

the grass crunched underneath their paws. Their route led them close to the wooden horse nests.

Hol yleaf felt her neck fur begin to bristle as she caught the scents of Twoleg and dog, but nothing moved and there was no sound.

She expected Brambleclaw to pass by quickly,

but instead he halted at the entrance to the horse nest. “Why are we stopping?” she asked.

“We won’t stay long,” Brambleclaw replied, “but there are some cats here I want Hazeltail to meet.

Hel o!” he cal ed softly through the opening.

Hazeltail looked up, puzzled, but before she could

speak, two cats appeared from the shadows. In the

lead was a muscular gray-and-white tom, with a smal er, paler she-cat just behind him.

“Brambleclaw!” The tom sounded surprised but

welcoming. “What are you doing here—and al these

others? I hope there’s no trouble in your Clan.”

“Nothing that need worry you,” Brambleclaw

replied.

“Who

are

they?”

Hol yleaf

whispered

in

Lionblaze’s ear.

Lionblaze shrugged. “No idea.”

“Smoky, Floss,” Brambleclaw went on, “this is

Hazeltail, Daisy’s daughter.” He twitched his ears to draw Hazeltail to his side, in front of the stable cats.

“Hazeltail, this is Smoky…your father.”

Hazeltail’s eyes widened in astonishment. “Daisy

brought us here when we were kits. Father!”

She rushed forward and rubbed her muzzle

against Smoky’s chin. Purring loudly, Smoky bent his head and gave her a lick around the ears. “I’ve missed you al ,” he murmured.

With the touch of his tail on her shoulder, he urged the smal she-cat forward. “Do you remember

Floss?” he prompted Hazeltail. “She helped Daisy look after you, when you were first born.”

Hazeltail looked uncertain. “I don’t remember



Hazeltail looked uncertain. “I don’t remember

that,” she mewed, dipping her head to Floss. “But I

do remember seeing you here when Daisy brought us back.”

“How is Daisy?” Smoky asked Brambleclaw. “And

the other kits…Berry and Mouse?”

“They’re al fine,” Hazeltail assured him, her eyes

sparkling. “They’re Berrynose and Mousewhisker

now. We’re al warriors of ThunderClan. Berrynose lost half his tail in a fox trap—”

Floss interrupted with a gasp. “Was he badly

hurt?”

“Not too badly,” Hazeltail replied. “Leafpool—

she’s our medicine cat—looked after him. He’s a strong warrior now, and so is Mousewhisker.”

“And Daisy?” There was a shadow of sadness in

Smoky’s eyes as he looked to Brambleclaw for an answer. “Is she happy in the Clan? She was so scared, that time she brought our kits back here after the badger attack.”

Brambleclaw nodded. “She has found her place.

She wil never be a warrior, but she is a true cat of ThunderClan.”

“She has two more kits!” Hazeltail broke in.



“Rosekit and Toadkit. They’re so cute!”

“I can see she has moved on,” Smoky murmured.

Then he gave his pelt a shake, as if dismissing memories. “So you’re a warrior now,” he meowed to

his daughter. “Show me what you’ve learned.”

“Okay.” Hazeltail dropped into the hunter’s crouch

and began to glide forward. “Now I’m stalking a mouse,” she explained. “You have to set your paws

down light as clouds, because the mouse wil feel the vibrations through the earth. Then when you’re ready

—” She paused, waggling her rump. “You pounce!”

She leaped into the air and landed with her front

paws gripping the tip of Birchfal ’s tail.

Birchfal jumped a tail-length off the ground. “Hey!

That hurt!”

Hazeltail’s eyes gleamed. “Attack me, then!”

Hol yleaf watched as Birchfal sprang for Hazeltail; she dodged to one side and fetched him a blow across the shoulder with her claws sheathed.

Birchfal whipped around and leaped on top of her with a screech; the two young cats wrestled together on the ground.

We were like that once, Hol yleaf thought. Not a care in the world. Seeing the pride in Smoky’s eyes, she felt a wave of jealousy sweep over her. Would my father be proud of me? she wondered. Does he

even know I exist?

“I’m impressed,” Smoky meowed, as Hazeltail

and Birchfal broke apart and sat up, shaking scraps of earth and debris out of their fur. “ThunderClan certainly teaches cats to look after themselves.”

Floss stepped forward, looking shy but friendly.

“Would you like to stay with us for the rest of the day?”

“Good idea.” Smoky stepped back and waved his

tail toward the inside of the horse nest. “It’s warm in here, and there are plenty of mice if you’re hungry.”

“Thanks, but no,” Brambleclaw replied. “We have

to keep going.”

“We’re on the trail of a kil er!” Hazeltail added.

Floss and Smoky exchanged an alarmed glance,

their neck fur beginning to fluff up. “What—who did they kil ?” Floss asked nervously.

“It’s a long story.” Brackenfur padded up, giving Smoky a calming touch on the shoulder with the tip

of his tail. “And you don’t have to be frightened about anything. We just need to speak to a cat who may have seen what happened.”



Smoky relaxed, the fur on his neck and shoulders

beginning to lie flat again. “What cat is this?” he asked.

“A white-and-brown tabby tom,” Brambleclaw

replied, “with very long fur and pale yel ow eyes.”

Floss caught her breath. “I saw a cat just like that!

He was heading across the field, very early, a couple of sunrises ago.”

“Then we’re hard on his paws,” Brambleclaw

purred. “Let’s go.”

Hazeltail padded up to her father and touched noses with him. “Good-bye,” she mewed. “I’l come to see you on the way back.”

“Come any time,” Smoky told her. Hol yleaf could

see how sad he was to let his daughter go so soon.

“I wil !” Hazeltail promised.

As they headed across the field, fol owing in Sol’s

paw steps, Birchfal veered to pad beside Hol yleaf.

“It must be weird to be halfClan,” he murmured, too

quietly for Hazeltail to hear him. “Imagine never seeing your kin.”

Hol yleaf didn’t reply. It’s better than what I am, she thought bleakly. I’m nothing Clan!





CHAPTER 5





As the patrol crossed the next field, snow began to

fal in soft feathery flakes that melted as soon as they touched the ground. Lionblaze sneezed as one

landed upon his nose.

At the opposite side of the field they came to a wide stretch of whitish stone, with huge red nests at one side. The snow was heavier by now, and a wind

had risen, whipping the flakes across the open expanse as they ventured onto the hard surface.

Lionblaze padded along beside Hol yleaf, trying to protect her from the worst of the wind.

Suddenly a loud snorting sound came from one of

the nests. Terror gripped Lionblaze’s limbs and he leaped forward, racing across the stone with the snow brushing his bel y fur. Hol yleaf hurtled beside him, with Hazeltail on his other side.

The sound came again, fol owed by a yowl from Brackenfur. “It’s okay! It’s only horses!”

Only horses! Lionblaze’s flying paws propel ed

him onward as he imagined the gigantic creatures with their heavy feet that could break a cat’s spine with one blow. A Twoleg gate loomed up out of the

swirling snow; he wriggled underneath it and

bunched his muscles to leap forward again. Hol yleaf and Hazeltail were just behind him.

“No!”

Brambleclaw

screeched.

“Stop!

Thunderpath!”

Lionblaze slammed to a halt as yel ow beams

sliced through the flurries of snow. A monster with glaring eyes swept past, buffeting Lionblaze’s fur and soaking his paws with a wave of dirty snowmelt.

He and his Clanmates shrank back; Lionblaze’s

heart was pounding with fear as he waited for Birchfal , Brackenfur, and Brambleclaw to join them.

“You cal yourselves warriors?” Brambleclaw’s

voice was scathing. “That was pure panic. The horses were inside their nests. There was no danger

until you decided to hurl yourselves into the path of a monster.”

“Sorry,” Lionblaze muttered. Searing shame

swept over him, hot as a forest fire. Brambleclaw’s harsh words stung al the more painful y because he

knew the deputy was right. They had acted like apprentices on their first venture out of the camp.

Hazeltail’s head was hanging in shame, and

Hol yleaf had turned away, lifting each paw in turn to shake the dirty water off her fur. Lionblaze knew how much it meant to her to uphold the warrior code; she must be furious with herself for being spooked like that. And what about you? he demanded silently.

The bravest warrior in ThunderClan, scared of a horse that isn’t even loose?

Brambleclaw let out a long sigh and relaxed. “Al

right. Let’s see about getting across here.”



Lionblaze heard the roar of another monster as the Clan deputy padded forward cautiously to the edge of the Thunderpath. The gleaming creature leaped past in a blaze of light; from the other direction, an even bigger monster came barreling along with a throaty growl, its round black paws as big as boulders.

How are we ever going to cross? We’ll be

squashed flat!

He could see that Hazeltail and Hol yleaf were stil

scared, their fur on end and their eyes wide with alarm. He knew he must look just the same. He braced himself to force his paws to carry him across the hard, black surface of the Thunderpath.

“Come up here beside me,” Brambleclaw

directed them calmly. “We’l cross one at a time.

Brackenfur, you can go first, to show them how it’s done.”

Brackenfur twitched his ears in acknowledgment.

“It’s not so bad,” he told the younger cats kindly. “The Thunderpath in the old forest was much bigger than

this.”

Birchfal ’s fur bristled. “Then I’m glad we don’t live there anymore!”



there anymore!”

Brackenfur padded up beside Brambleclaw and

waited for another monster to sweep past. Its roar died away in the distance.

“Okay, go,” mewed Brambleclaw.

Brackenfur leaped forward, his golden brown pelt

almost vanishing in the swirling snow. When he reached the other side, everything was stil quiet.

“Hol yleaf, go!”

Taking a gulp of air, Hol yleaf hurled herself across the Thunderpath. Lionblaze dug his claws into the ground, trying to stop himself from shaking, until he saw her reach Brackenfur’s side safely.

The growling of another monster was approaching

through the snow. Lionblaze flinched back as it came into sight: a huge creature in glaring colors. His heart raced even faster when he saw several Twolegs in its bel y as it flashed past.

Did it eat them? Will it eat us?

“Lionblaze, now you go.”

Summoning al his courage, Lionblaze stepped up

beside Brambleclaw and launched himself forward.

For a few heartbeats his world was ful of the choking stink of the monster that had just passed by, and the black stuff scraped his pads as he raced across.

Then he was standing on a narrow strip of grass between the Thunderpath and a prickly hedge, and Hol yleaf was pressing her pelt against his.

“We did it,” she murmured.

“You know, Birchfal is right,” Lionblaze whispered

back, as his heartbeat gradual y calmed. “If the old Thunderpath was worse than this, I wouldn’t want to

live near it, either!”

A moment later Hazeltail joined them, and then Birchfal . A stream of monsters fol owed, leaving Brambleclaw marooned on the other side. Final y the

last of the monsters disappeared, though Lionblaze

could stil hear their roaring in the air.

Brambleclaw bounded out onto the Thunderpath,

racing for the other side. Another monster appeared

in the distance, and Birchfal screeched, “Look out!”

The Clan deputy didn’t break stride. Long before the monster swept past, he was safely across, among his Clanmates.

“See, nothing to it.” He flicked an ear dismissively.

“Now let’s keep going.”





The wet leaves and debris under the branches of

the hedge plastered themselves to Lionblaze’s bel y

fur as he flattened himself to crawl into the next field.

A strong scent flooded over him as he struggled to

his paws on the other side. He felt as though he ought to remember it, but the memory slipped away

from him like an elusive piece of prey.

“What are those?” Hazeltail asked nervously,

angling her ears toward the center of the field.

Lionblaze peered through the snowflakes. Ahead

of them, clustered together in smal groups, were several huge animals with black-and-white pelts. As

he examined them, one of them raised its head and

let out a low, mournful sound.

“Cows!” Hol yleaf exclaimed, coming to stand

beside her brother. “You remember, Lionblaze. We saw them on the way to the mountains.”



“Cows—of course.” Lionblaze’s mind flew back to

the time when they had encountered the old loner, Purdy. He had shown the cows to them as they passed a farm; his mother—no, Squirrelflight—had

told them the massive creatures weren’t dangerous,

provided they didn’t step on you.

“The cows are okay,” Brambleclaw reassured

Hazeltail, as he emerged from the hedge. “They won’t attack us.”

Hazeltail gave him a doubtful look, and as

Brackenfur took the lead across the field, Lionblaze was inclined to share her concern.

The cows gathered around them, gazing down at

them with huge liquid eyes. Lionblaze was far closer to their stony feet than he wanted to be, and he didn’t like the looks of the big curved claws sticking out of their heads. Fighting techniques wouldn’t be much use against animals this size. The cows bent down

and sniffed at the cats’ fur with hot, wet breath; Lionblaze thought he was going to choke on the strong reek of their scent, and their doleful moaning almost deafened him.

As Brackenfur led them calmly through the forest

of legs, one of the long, swishing tails gave Hol yleaf a stinging slap in the face. She leaped backward, cannoning into Lionblaze.

“Fox dung!” she snapped.

Lionblaze steadied her until she got her balance.

“I’m starting to wonder if this is such a great adventure,” she muttered, with a glance at Hazeltail, who nodded vigorously in agreement. “The journey to

the mountains was much easier than this, even with

the dogs in the barn.”

And there was some point to that journey,

Lionblaze added silently. We weren’t just looking for a cat I know isn’t a murderer.

Leaving the cows behind, the cats trekked through

the snow toward the other side of the field. Lionblaze tasted the air for Sol’s scent, but he couldn’t pick up a trace of it.

I can’t smell anything except cow, he grumbled silently. I can barely find my own Clanmates!

To his relief, he soon made out the next hedge, looming black against the swirling snow. The patrol

plodded up to it and halted in the shelter of the thickly packed thorns.

“We’l never get through there!” Birchfal

exclaimed, his eyes wide with dismay. “We’l be ripped to pieces.”

“No, we won’t,” Brambleclaw mewed. “We just

need to look for a place where the hedge is thinner.”

He began to lead the way along the bottom of the

hedge. I hope we don’t have to go back, Lionblaze

thought miserably, trying to shake the snow off his pelt.

His heart fel even further when he made out the roar of another Thunderpath, somewhere on the

other side of the hedge. “Not again!” he muttered.

At last Brambleclaw halted. “This might do.” He pointed with his muzzle at a spot in the hedge where two arching branches left a tiny gap between them.

“Lionblaze, wil you give it a try?”

Lionblaze nodded and stepped forward, testing

the width of the gap with his whiskers. Then he flattened himself to the ground and dragged himself

forward. Thorns raked across his back, and he felt his fur snag on them as he struggled through to the

other side and scrambled to his paws.

“It’s okay,” he cal ed.

As Hol yleaf and Birchfal fol owed, Lionblaze

looked out over a vast white landscape. The ground

sloped gently down to the Thunderpath he had



sloped gently down to the Thunderpath he had

heard: It was much wider than the first one, with monsters roaring up and down in both directions.

Glaring Twoleg lights edged it on both sides.

We’ll never get across that! he thought

despairingly.

A startled yowl distracted him; spinning around, he saw Hazeltail emerging from the hedge and

pawing frantical y at her muzzle.

“I’ve got a thorn in my nose!” she wailed.

“Let me see.” Hol yleaf padded up to her. “Keep stil , and stop clawing at it.”

Hazeltail sat down, her eyes fil ed with pain. The thorn was a huge one, firmly embedded in her nose.

Bright blood wel ed out around it.

Lionblaze watched his sister using the medicine cat skil s she had learned long ago from Leafpool.

Hol yleaf licked the area around the thorn and got a good grip on it with her teeth. Pul ing firmly, she drew out the thorn and spat it onto the ground. More blood gushed out of Hazeltail’s nose and splashed onto the snow.

“Ouch!” Hazeltail protested.

“We real y need some water to rinse the blood away and close the wound,” Hol yleaf meowed.

Lionblaze glanced around, ready to fetch some for

her, but there was no sign of any streams….

“Press your muzzle into the snow,” Hol yleaf

instructed Hazeltail. “That wil stop the bleeding.”

Blinking doubtful y, Hazeltail dipped her head and

buried her nose in a patch of clean white snow. “It’s very cold!” came a muffled meow.

“Stay there a bit longer,” Hol yleaf urged. “I promise it wil help.”

I hope it will, Lionblaze thought, or Hollyleaf could just be freezing Hazeltail’s nose off. He could see how worried his sister looked as she watched her Clanmate.

Hazeltail kept her face pressed into the snow for

several long moments, then lifted her head. Clumps

of white clung to her face, making her look as if she were turning into Cloudtail, with his long, snow-colored pelt. “I-it doesn’t h-hurt so much now,” she reported through chattering teeth.

Hol yleaf bent forward to inspect the wound left by

the thorn. Careful y she brushed the snow away with

her paw. The injury looked like a neat, clean hole, almost sealed up already. “I think that did the trick,”



she meowed.

“Wel done.” Brambleclaw’s rumbling purr

sounded behind Hol yleaf. Lionblaze saw him

blinking warmly at her with the same fatherly pride in his eyes that Smoky had shown when he was

watching Hazeltail.

Hol yleaf turned away; Lionblaze knew how much

she must want to respond, but she couldn’t. Once Brambleclaw’s approval had meant so much to al of

them. But not anymore. Whatever skills we have, they didn’t come from you.

The snow was starting to ease off, but the cloud covering the sky made it impossible to tel where the sun

was. Maybe it’s nearly sunset, Lionblaze

thought, shivering. Straight ahead lay the huge Thunderpath, and beyond it the land stretched flat as far as they could see, unbroken except for a smal copse in the middle of the openness. Beyond it, over to one side, Lionblaze made out a mass of twinkling

lights.

“What’s that?” he asked, pointing with his tail. “It looks as if a lot of stars have fal en down to earth.”

“No, that’s lots and lots of Twoleg nests, al together,” Brackenfur explained.



Hazeltail gasped. “I didn’t think there were as many Twolegs as that in the whole world!”

“I hope we don’t have to go near them,” Birchfal added.

Hazeltail nodded, while Lionblaze muttered,

“We’re not kittypets.” He felt as if he was trying to convince himself.

Brambleclaw and Brackenfur led the way down to

the Thunderpath and crouched at the edge, one at each end of the line of cats. Monsters growled past, their blazing lights reflecting off the wet black surface.

“This time we’l al cross together, once there’s a

big enough gap,” Brambleclaw decided. “When I say

run, run as if a whole tribe of badgers was after you.”

Lionblaze tried desperately to hide his fear as he

waited for the deputy’s signal. This was far worse than the Thunderpath they had crossed earlier. It seemed as if the stream of monsters would never end!

Next to him, Hazeltail was quivering too, and beyond her, Birchfal ’s fur was bristling as if he faced a horde of enemies. On Lionblaze’s other side, Hol yleaf worked her claws furiously in the ground, Hol yleaf worked her claws furiously in the ground, her eyes fixed on Brambleclaw as she waited for the

command to cross.

Why do I have to be brave all the time?

Lionblaze asked himself miserably. I shouldn’t have

to be, not now we know the prophecy wasn’t about

us. As far as we know, we could be kittypets!

Horror and shame swept over him at the thought.

He was so wrapped up in his dismay that he almost

missed Brambleclaw’s yowled signal: “Now!”





CHAPTER 6





Hollyleaf leaped forward with her Clanmates. As they reached the middle of the Thunderpath, she heard the roar of another monster in the distance, rapidly growing louder. Dazzling light angled across her as the huge creature seemed to leap out of nowhere. Hol yleaf ran even harder, pushing with her paws against the hard surface to drive herself faster and faster to the other side.

A terrified screech split the air. When Hol yleaf gained the safety of the grass beyond, she spun around to see Hazeltail rigid with fear, crouching in the middle of the Thunderpath in the path of the monster.

“No!” Hol yleaf yowled. “Hazeltail, run!”

Hazeltail was too panic-stricken to move. With a snarl of fury, Brambleclaw darted back onto the Thunderpath and grabbed her by the scruff, almost under the paws of the oncoming monster.

“It’l kil them both!” Birchfal wailed.

The monster’s blazing eyebeams raked across

the two warriors as Brambleclaw dragged his

Clanmate across the black surface. Hazeltail’s legs

dangled at first, as if she were dead; then in a heartbeat she scrambled to her paws and fled.

Brambleclaw dashed after her, the monster almost on top of his haunches. For a heartbeat, Hol yleaf was certain that he would be crushed under the monster’s whirling paws; then it was roaring past them, and Brambleclaw was stil running. Hazeltail col apsed onto the grass and Brambleclaw skidded

to a halt beside her.

He let out a disgusted snort. “That was an

example of how not to cross a Thunderpath.”

“I’m sorry.” Hazeltail sounded like a frightened kit.

“I’m so sorry!”

The rest of the cats flopped down, panting. Even

Lionblaze looked ruffled. Sol must be braver than any of us realized, Hol yleaf thought as she tried to calm her breathing. He made this journey all by himself!

Brackenfur padded up to Hazeltail and gave her a

comforting lick. “It’s okay,” he murmured. “We al make mistakes.”

“But I could have gotten Brambleclaw kil ed!”

Hazeltail’s eyes were wide with horror. “Thank you, Brambleclaw. You saved my life!”

The fury in Brambleclaw’s eyes faded, and he

blinked. “Just make sure I don’t have to do it again.”

“I promise you won’t.”

After al owing them a few moments to rest,

Brambleclaw urged the patrol members to their

paws again. “We can’t stay here,” he meowed. “Let’s



paws again. “We can’t stay here,” he meowed. “Let’s

head for the trees. There might be some prey there.”

The cats fol owed him as he struck out across the

prickly grass. The snow had stopped, but it stil lay thickly on the ground, clogging Hol yleaf’s paws as she limped after her Clan deputy. My fur’s so cold I think I’m turning into an ice cat, she thought, trying to shake the cold white clumps off her feet. A cold wind was blowing into their faces, catching up the loose snow and flinging it into her eyes. “Mouse dung, that stings!” she muttered.

As they drew closer to the copse, she could see

that the trees were shorter than the ones on ThunderClan territory, and twisted into strange shapes. They looked like the bushes on WindClan’s

moorland territory, bent double like hunched

Twolegs. But as she tasted the air, Hol yleaf realized that the smel s were more familiar than anything she had scented since she left the forest. The reek of the Thunderpath was dying away, and in its place she could pick up the scents of leaf and bark; water flooded her jaws as she recognized mouse, rabbit, and squirrel.

“We’l stay here to eat and rest,” Brambleclaw announced when the cats reached the edge of the trees. “We won’t find anywhere better to spend the night.”

Birchfal ’s ears perked up, and Hol yleaf

exchanged a hopeful glance with Lionblaze at the thought of not having to plod any farther through the snow.

“It can’t be sunset yet,” Brackenfur objected, eyeing the gray clouds that stil shouldered their way across the sky.

“No, but we’re al tired and cold,” Brambleclaw replied. “And when we can’t see the sun, we can’t be sure that we’re heading the right way to the sun-drown-place.”

Brackenfur shrugged, agreeing, and al six cats headed deeper into the copse. There wasn’t as much snow under the shelter of the trees, and Hol yleaf felt her paws starting to warm up. The ground was uneven, sloping roughly down to where a

smal stream trickled among the roots of the trees.

“Catch your prey and then rest,” Brambleclaw

ordered. Hol yleaf thought he sounded tense—

perhaps he was unhappy about where their journey would take them next. Does he know there’s



something dangerous up ahead?

Brackenfur vanished into the undergrowth, and

Lionblaze and Birchfal headed off together.

“Would you like to hunt with me?” Hol yleaf asked

Hazeltail; her Clanmate stil looked shocked by her panic at the Thunderpath.

“That would be great!” Hazeltail’s ears flicked up.

“Where should we start?”

“Right here’s as good as anywhere.”

Both she-cats tasted the air; Hol yleaf picked up a

strong scent of squirrel, and a moment later she spotted one scuffling among the debris at the foot of a twisted thorn tree. Angling her ears, she pointed it out to Hazeltail. Her friend nodded, eyes gleaming.

Hol yleaf signaled to Hazeltail to stay where she was, then dropped into a hunter’s crouch and

worked her way in a wide circle around to the other

side of the tree. She had carried out this hunting move so often in ThunderClan territory that it almost felt as if she were home again. Approaching the squirrel from the other side, she crept closer and closer, sliding her paws through the rough grass.

When she thought she was close enough, she let out

a fearsome yowl and leaped. Panicked, the squirrel



darted away, only to run straight into Hazeltail’s claws. Hazeltail dispatched it with a swift bite to the neck.

“Great catch!” Hol yleaf exclaimed.

“You set it up,” Hazeltail mewed; she looked a lot

more cheerful now.

As Hol yleaf padded over to her friend, Lionblaze

came bounding out from behind a bramble thicket.

“Birchfal and I got a real y fat rabbit.”

Birchfal appeared as he spoke, staggering as he

dragged the rabbit between his forepaws. Dropping

it with a gusty sigh, he stumbled into the low-growing branches of a hazel bush. A load of snow slid down

and covered him; he emerged hissing with disgust,

shaking snow from his pelt.

Hol yleaf couldn’t suppress a smal mrrow of

laughter. “Watch out, or we’l have to cal you Snowfal ,” she purred.

The four young cats dragged their prey into a sheltered hol ow beside the stream, where the

ground was covered with a drift of dead leaves.

Soon Brackenfur appeared with another squirrel, and Brambleclaw with a couple of mice. As they ate,

the warmth of their bodies spread throughout the the warmth of their bodies spread throughout the hol ow; with the branches of the bushes straggling overhead, Hol yleaf thought it almost felt like a den.

Ful and comfortable, she swept her tongue

around her jaws. “I could sleep for a moon,” she announced drowsily.

“Fine,” meowed Brambleclaw, “but we’d better set

a watch.”

“I’l go first,” Lionblaze offered.

“Okay.” Brambleclaw stretched his jaws in an

enormous yawn. “Wake me when you’re ready, and

I’l take the next one.”

As Hol yleaf settled down to sleep, the last thing she saw was her brother’s golden tabby shape, his

ears pricked as he stared through the trees.





A paw prodding into her side woke Hol yleaf.

Blinking in confusion, she thought at first she was in the warriors’ den. But where’s all the moss and bracken? And why can I hear running water?

Then she remembered she was on the journey to

the sun-drown-place, with Brambleclaw and the

others. The ThunderClan camp lay a day’s travel behind them, and everything here was new and

strange.

Hazeltail was gazing down at her. “It’s your watch,”

she mewed. “You’re the last.”

Hol yleaf staggered to her paws and arched her back in a stretch. Lionblaze, Birchfal , and

Brackenfur were al curled up close by. “Where’s Brambleclaw?” she yawned.



“He woke up while I was on watch,” Hazeltail explained. “He said he was going to scout ahead.”

She settled herself comfortably among the leaves and wrapped her tail over her nose. “I’m going to get some more sleep while I can,” she murmured.

Hol yleaf groomed the scraps of dead leaf out of

her pelt, then padded the two or three paw steps to

the edge of the stream. Before she bent to lap, she

let her gaze travel over the trees that surrounded her; she could just make out their branches against the sky, which was beginning to fade from black to gray.

Everything was quiet.

She took a long drink of the icy water; as she shook the drops from her whiskers, she heard a loud

alarm cal and caught a glimpse of a blackbird shooting upward. A moment later Brambleclaw

came stalking through the trees, carrying a rabbit in his jaws.

“The hunting is good here,” he remarked,

dropping his prey at Hol yleaf’s paws.

The rich scent of the fresh-kil made Hol yleaf’s mouth water. “Should I catch some more?” she

suggested. “One rabbit won’t go far between six of us.”



“Fine,” Brambleclaw replied. “But don’t go out of the copse. I’l wake the others. Next time, you can take first watch,” he added. “But right now we need

to keep moving.”

Hol yleaf fol owed the stream, bounded up beside

a smal waterfal , and practical y fel over a vole just before it could slip into its hole in the bank.

Scratching earth over its limp body, she climbed the bank and stood tasting the air, her ears alert for the tiny sounds of prey. Soon she spotted a mouse nibbling seeds under a bush. Her paws lighter than

air, Hol yleaf glided over the ground and broke the mouse’s neck with a swift blow of her paw. Then she

went back to col ect the vole, and returned to the hol ow with both pieces of fresh-kil .

She would have been proud of her hunting skil s once, especial y when she could show Brambleclaw

how fast she could bring back prey. Now she

couldn’t even meet the deputy’s gaze as he

congratulated her. Al her training, everything she thought she knew, was nothing but dust if she wasn’t even a real Clan cat.

Al six cats were awake. They ate quickly and fol owed Brambleclaw to the edge of the copse.



“We’re not far from Midnight’s home now,” he

meowed. “Be careful, and keep close to me.”

The land ahead was flat and empty, except for the

Twoleg nests, with no shelter in sight. The sky was clear but for a few ragged, scudding clouds, and behind the patrol it shone milky-pale with dawn. The wind hit Hol ypaw in the face as soon as she left the shelter of the trees. It felt cold and sharp, with an unfamiliar tang, like the scent of frozen blood.

“It’s going to blow my fur off!” she heard Birchfal

complain.

Hol yleaf’s eyes and mouth stung, and her pelt felt

sticky. She screwed up her eyes and ducked her head, keeping close to Lionblaze as they trekked on

and on across the brittle grass until, beneath the whistling of the wind, Hol yleaf could make out a dul roaring, like nothing she had ever heard before.

Suddenly Lionblaze halted; unable to stop in time,

Hol yleaf bumped into him. Hissing in annoyance, she staggered as Hazeltail col ided with her from behind. Raising her head, Hol yleaf saw that

Brambleclaw and Brackenfur were standing side by

side at the head of the patrol, staring at something.

Hol yleaf padded up to them, the rest of the cats Hol yleaf padded up to them, the rest of the cats fal ing into a line alongside.

Great StarClan! They had reached the very edge

of the land! At their paws, the ground fel away into a tumble of rocks. Stretching in front of them, as far as Hol yleaf could see, was an endless expanse of heaving, roaring gray water.

“Welcome to the sun-drown-place,” Brambleclaw

meowed.





CHAPTER 7





Jayfeather stood in the clearing after the Sol patrol had left, sniffing the tang of snow on the dawn wind.

He could hear rustling as several cats pushed their way through the branches of the warriors’ den. There was a strange sense of tension among his

Clanmates.

“Dawn patrol.” Graystripe’s voice came from

close by Jayfeather. “Sandstorm, you can lead. Take

Foxpaw and Squirrelflight with you. And take care along the WindClan border.”

“Do I have to go with them?” Jayfeather heard the

dismayed voice of Foxpaw. “I don’t like WindClan.”

“Shh.” Ferncloud sounded shocked. “You know

there’s nothing to be frightened of anymore.”

Jayfeather winced; it sounded as if most of the Clan believed that Sol was the murderer, and there

was nothing more to worry about. But they’re wrong!

They’re completely wrong!

“Foxpaw, you’re my apprentice,” Squirrelflight

meowed with an edge of annoyance in her voice. “Of

course you come with me. Or if you’d rather, you can go and search the elders for ticks.”

“Uh…no, I guess I’l come.”

“You’l be fine,” Firestar assured the apprentice; Jayfeather hadn’t heard him come down from the Highledge. “Who have we got for hunting patrols, Graystripe?”



“I thought I’d lead one,” the gray warrior meowed.

“I’l take Sorreltail and Mousewhisker.” In a lower voice he added to Firestar, “If you or I do the border patrols, every cat wil think there’s something to be scared of.”

“Good thinking,” Firestar agreed.

“Dustpelt, wil you lead another hunting patrol,”

Graystripe went on more loudly. “Cloudtail and Brightheart can go with you. Try the ShadowClan border, but remember what Brambleclaw said about

being careful not to cross it.”

“I wasn’t born yesterday, thanks,” Dustpelt

snapped, irritation sparking from him.

“Should we take Icepaw?” Brightheart asked.

“She doesn’t get out much, now that Whitewing is in

the nursery.”

“Sure,” Graystripe meowed. “Icepaw! Stop batting

that bark around and come over here.”

Jayfeather heard the scampering of paws and

excited mews as the other apprentice bounded up.

“You’re going hunting with Dustpelt, Cloudtail, and Brightheart,” Graystripe told them. “We’re counting on you to bring back a lot of fresh-kil .”

“I’m sure you wil ,” Firestar assured her. “You’re doing so wel .”

Jayfeather could feel the apprentice’s happy pride

as she padded over to join the senior warriors.

“It won’t be long before we’l be holding another warrior ceremony,” Firestar remarked to Graystripe.

Although his words sounded cheerful, Jayfeather picked up the doubt buzzing beneath them. He knew

that his Clan leader’s thoughts were with the patrol of Clanmates who were heading off to find Sol.

Did Sol really kill Ashfur? Was I right to send so

many warriors to look for him? Will my Clan be vulnerable without them? Jayfeather could hear his

leader’s thoughts as clearly as if Firestar had spoken them aloud. To his surprise, he realized that Firestar stil felt weak after the attack of greencough that had taken one of his nine lives. Lurking in his mind was the fear that the sickness would return.

And maybe he’s right, Jayfeather thought. He

could hear Spiderleg wheezing over by the nursery,

as his kits tumbled al over him.

“That’s right,” their mother, Daisy, meowed. “You can practice your fighting moves with your father.

Spiderleg, can’t you be a scarier badger than that?”

“Badgers…don’t”—Spiderleg was finding it hard



“Badgers…don’t”—Spiderleg was finding it hard

to catch his breath—“get…greencough,” he finished

painful y.

Nearby Mil ie was grooming her three kits,

breaking off every now and then to cough. “Don’t stay out if it gets too cold,” Graystripe warned her, bounding over to her side. “And you three kits—don’t play too rough with your mother.”

Jayfeather heard Blossomkit’s high-pitched mew.

“We won’t.”

“Right, the patrols can go now,” Graystripe

announced as he returned. “Keep a good lookout, and report anything you see that’s at al strange.”

The stone hol ow was quiet after al the patrols had left; the remaining warriors returned to their den to get out of the cold. Daisy and Mil ie rounded up the kits.

“It’s time for some exercise,” Daisy meowed.

“Running around wil keep you warm. Who can fetch

me a twig from the thorn barrier and get back here

first?”

“I can!” al the kits yowled together, and they pelted across the clearing. Jayfeather jumped back

to avoid being knocked over and retreated into his den.

As soon as he set paw behind the bramble

screen, the dust from churned-up moss and bracken

hit him in the nose. “What’s going on?” he asked, stifling a sneeze.

“I’m changing the bedding,” Leafpool explained.

“Can you come over here and rol up this moss, please?”

Jayfeather padded over, his paws sinking into the

heaps of moss and bracken that Leafpool had

already clawed together. “I think it’s going to snow,”

he pointed out. “Al the fresh stuff wil be soaked with it.”

“We can squeeze the water out,” Leafpool replied.

“This old bedding is disgusting. How can we ask sick cats to sleep in it?”

I’d rather sleep in it, Jayfeather thought, than go outside to get freezing cold and wet.

He was starting to push the piles together, half burying himself in dried fronds of fern and clumps of moss, when he heard a cat brush past the brambles.

He picked up Firestar’s scent above the dusty smel

of the bedding.

“How are you, Leafpool?” Firestar meowed.



“Fine, thanks.” Leafpool’s tone was brisk, and she

didn’t stop raking out the remains of the bedding.

“There’s something I want to ask you….”

Firestar’s voice trailed off, and Jayfeather picked up strong waves of anxiety coming from him. He

crouched among the ferns, trying not to sneeze again and hoping that whatever Firestar had to say

didn’t need to be said in private.

“Wel ?” Leafpool prompted.

“It’s just—” Firestar broke off again.

Spit it out! Jayfeather urged him silently.

“I know it’s not my place to tel a medicine cat how to speak with StarClan,” Firestar meowed, sounding

more awkward with every word. “But I wondered…

have you thought of finding Ashfur in StarClan and asking him who kil ed him?”

What? Jayfeather nearly choked on a piece of

moss.

For a long moment Leafpool was silent; when she

spoke at last, her voice was as icy as leaf-bare snow. “It’s not my choice whom I meet in StarClan.

Our ancestors approach me; I cannot search them out. If Ashfur comes to me and wishes to talk, then I wil listen.”



It wasn’t only shock and anger she felt as she answered Firestar, Jayfeather realized. There was something else behind that: Could it be…fear?

“I’m sorry,” Firestar apologized. “I didn’t think…”

“I’l do al I can, I promise,” Leafpool added more

gently. “I want to know who kil ed Ashfur as much as you do.”

So why am I finding it hard to believe her?

Jayfeather asked himself.





Later that day, after Jayfeather had cleared out al

the old bedding and delivered tansy to the cats stil suffering from the after-effects of greencough, he padded over to the fresh-kil pile and chose a vole. A thick flurry of snow had swept across the clearing earlier, but now a weak ray of sunlight warmed his fur.

While he was eating, he scented Leafpool

emerging from the elders’ den with Mousefur and Longtail padding behind her.

“Jayfeather?” Leafpool cal ed to him. “When



“Jayfeather?” Leafpool cal ed to him. “When

you’ve finished there I want you to go out for a strol with Mousefur and Longtail. It’l be the first time they’ve been out of the camp since the greencough.”

Jayfeather gulped down a mouthful of vole.

“Okay.”

“We’re not kits, you know,” Mousefur grumbled.

“We can be trusted to get to the lake and back without some cat guiding our paws.”

“I know,” Leafpool replied patiently. “But I want Jayfeather to look for herbs. We’re getting very low on tansy. We could do with chervil and yarrow, too.

There might stil be something growing under the trees near the lake.”

Mousefur’s only response was an exaggerated

sigh; Jayfeather pictured the skinny brown elder rol ing her eyes.

Leafpool padded up to Jayfeather, close enough

to brush his pelt. “I want you to take special care of Mousefur,” she whispered. “Make sure she doesn’t go too far, and check her breathing.” More loudly she added, “Mousefur, maybe you and Longtail could help Jayfeather carry back any herbs he finds.”

“I think we might just about manage that,”



Mousefur growled.

Jayfeather swal owed the last of his vole and led

the way across the clearing and through the thorn tunnel. Mousefur fol owed him, guiding Longtail. The forest seemed very quiet now that most of the leaves had fal en from the trees. Jayfeather had to push his way through mounds of dead leaves on the ground and keep alert to avoid drifts of snow that stil remained under the trees. The air tingled with frost.

The scent of water led him toward the lake. He kept one ear pricked for Mousefur and Longtail, who

padded beside him, and sensed before Mousefur

the branch that had fal en across their path.

“This way,” he mewed to Longtail, laying his tail over the blind tabby’s shoulders to guide him around the obstacle. “It’s okay, you won’t get your paws tangled.”

“I think you see better than any of us.” Mousefur didn’t sound as grouchy as usual; she almost

seemed impressed.

I wish I did, Jayfeather thought. Right now I can’t see far enough. He wanted to know what had

happened to the prophecy, and whether Rock knew

anything about the secret Squirrelflight had revealed.



Most of al , he wanted to know who his real parents

were.

The trees thinned out and cold wind hit Jayfeather

in the face as the three cats neared the lake.

“You go off and do whatever you have to,”

Mousefur meowed. “Longtail and I are going to find a nice patch of sun to snooze in.”

“Yes, there should be plenty of herbs—”

“Look,” the skinny brown elder interrupted, “I know

Leafpool only sent you along with us to be sure we

made it to the lake without keeling over. You’l be lucky to find enough herbs to fil your own mouth this far into leaf-bare!”

“It’s not like that,” Jayfeather protested.

“Go on, we’l be fine,” Longtail insisted.

“And if you need our help, just cal ,” Mousefur added. “I might be a bit unsteady on my feet, but there’s nothing wrong with my ears.”

“Fine.” Relieved to be free of his duty, Jayfeather

pelted along the lakeshore until he reached the twisted tree roots where he had hidden the stick. The cold wind from the lake blew his fur the wrong way as he tugged it out and dragged it under an elder bush.

Then he lay down with his paws resting on the scratches.

Come on, Rock. I need to talk to you.

Alarm trickled down his spine as he realized he might find himself back with the Ancient Clan.

Something inside him was drawing him back—

desire to see the friends he had made there, curiosity about how they had coped on the journey to the mountains—but he had to fight against it. He knew that the Ancient Clan sharpclaws couldn’t help

him now.

Jayfeather concentrated as hard as he could,

trying to picture the underground cave where Rock waited, but he could stil feel grass under his bel y and a twig tickling his ear.

“There’s no need for that,” a voice behind him rumbled. “The stick isn’t the answer to everything.”

Jayfeather’s eyes flew open, and he realized that

he could see. He was stil under the elder bush; turning, he saw Rock standing behind him, almost transparent against the grass and trees. Rock crept

under the bush to join Jayfeather, his hairless body smel ing of stone and the endless dark of the tunnels.

Jayfeather suppressed a shiver. “Did you know al

along that Squirrelflight was lying to us?” he along that Squirrelflight was lying to us?” he demanded.

Rock’s bulging, sightless eyes turned toward him.

“The answers lie within your own Clan,” he replied, “if you can find them.”

“That’s no answer,” Jayfeather mewed irritably. “I need your help!”

“I cannot give the kind of help you want,” Rock warned him.

“Then what about the prophecy? If we’re not

Firestar’s kin—”

“Make your own future, Jayfeather,” the spirit-cat interrupted. “Don’t expect it to be dropped at your paws like a piece of fresh-kil .”

Every hair on Jayfeather’s pelt prickled with

annoyance. How was he supposed to make his own

future if no cat would tell him anything? He dug his claws into the earth.

“Jayfeather!” Mousefur’s voice came from the

edge of the lake. “Jayfeather!”

Darkness slammed down over Jayfeather’s

vision. The scent of Rock vanished.

“Jayfeather, where are you?”

He crawled out from under the elder bush, kicking



dead leaves and debris over the stick. He would have to come back later and hide it properly.

“What are you doing under there?” Mousefur

asked, padding up to him. “We’re ready to go back

now. We wondered if you have any herbs for us to carry.”

“Er…no, I haven’t found any,” Jayfeather

stammered.

Mousefur sighed. “Maybe you’re not looking in the

right place. Last I heard, herbs don’t grow wel under elder bushes. There’s a huge clump of tansy just behind you,” she added.

Jayfeather’s pelt grew hot with embarrassment.

He should have taken time to grab a few herbs before he tried to speak with Rock. He had been so

intent on finding the spirit-cat that he hadn’t even noticed the sharp scent of the tansy.

“Thanks,” he muttered.

He was aware of Mousefur’s irritation as he and the skinny elder picked the herbs together. There wasn’t enough for Jayfeather to need help carrying it, and he scented no other herbs as al three cats headed back toward the camp.

“Is that al ?” Leafpool asked; she was waiting outside the den when Jayfeather arrived with the tansy. “What about the yarrow and chervil I asked for?”

“I couldn’t find any,” Jayfeather mumbled around the bunch of stems.

Leafpool snorted. “Didn’t look, more likely.

Jayfeather, I didn’t send you out there to waste time.

You have to do what you’re supposed to!” Her voice

deepened to a snarl. “If every cat did that, there wouldn’t be any problems.”

Who put ants in her fur? Jayfeather wondered. It

wasn’t like Leafpool to be so short-tempered. For once he didn’t want to argue with her, so he just headed for the den to put the tansy away.

Leafpool brushed past him. “Leave that! I’l do it.”

She almost snatched the herbs out of his jaws; fury

rol ed off her as she carried them into the cave.

Jayfeather backed out of the den and padded

across to the fresh-kil pile. But he had eaten earlier, and even a freshly caught mouse couldn’t tempt him.

There were pangs in his bel y sharper than hunger: Already he missed Lionblaze and Hol yleaf more than he would have thought possible. They had never

been separated for this long before.



In the dream Midnight had said that the patrol was

chasing wild geese and Rock had told him that the

answers lay inside ThunderClan itself. But Jayfeather didn’t know how he was going to find them on his own. What kind of power was it, to walk in other cats’

dreams, when you woke up stil blind? There was no

way he was going to find out anything when he was

trapped in darkness at every step.





CHAPTER 8





Lionblaze forgot to breathe as he stared across the

vast gray water. Sharp, cold wind buffeted his fur; he felt as though it could sweep him off his paws at any moment and hurl him down the cliffs to the rocks far below.

“This way,” Brambleclaw ordered. He led the

patrol along the edge of the cliff to a narrow gul y lined with scrubby grass. Lionblaze gasped in relief as he stepped out of the wind.

“Midnight

the

badger

lives

near

here,”

Brambleclaw went on, once the patrol was clustered

around him at the bottom of the gul y.

“How did you know where to find her?” Hol yleaf asked curiously.

“We didn’t,” the Clan deputy admitted. “We didn’t

even know we were looking for a badger.” He

twitched his tail-tip. “I found Midnight’s den by fal ing into it.”

Hazeltail’s eyes stretched wide. “Were you hurt?”

“Weren’t you scared of Midnight?” Birchfal



added.

Brambleclaw flicked one ear as if he were trying

to get rid of a fly. “This isn’t the time for stories. We have to keep going.”

He led his patrol through the gul y, every so often

climbing the slope to pop his head out and see how

far along the cliff they were. Lionblaze and the others stayed crouching in the dip, listening to the blast of wind overhead.

At last Brambleclaw beckoned them with his tail to

join him at the top. “We’re almost there,” he told them. “Fol ow me closely.”

Lionblaze and the rest of the patrol flattened their bel ies to the short, bristly grass as they padded after Brambleclaw toward the edge of the cliff.

Is he going to jump over? Lionblaze wondered, as each paw step took them closer to the sheer drop.

But just before the land vanished from under their

paws, Brambleclaw jumped down into a much

deeper, narrower gul y, sloping steeply through a dip in the cliffs. Brackenfur and the other cats fol owed him, with Lionblaze bringing up the rear. The sharp stones that covered the bottom of the gul y dug into his pads or skidded from under him, nearly carrying

him off his paws. Birchfal slipped, crashing into Hazeltail, and Brackenfur had to block the two younger cats before they hurtled down any farther.

“Thanks!” Birchfal gasped.

“Just watch where you’re putting your paws,”

Brackenfur mewed.

The gul y led down to a rocky shore, the sand almost completely covered with pebbles. Lionblaze had seen waves on the lake when the wind blew hard, but these waves were much bigger, crashing onto the rocks with spurts of foam. Hazeltail stared at them, wide-eyed, so scared that she could scarcely

put one paw in front of another.

“I hate this,” Hol yleaf muttered, backing away toward the cliff face. “My fur’s getting al wet and sticky.” She turned her head to give her shoulder a lick. “Yuck!”

Lionblaze felt the same stickiness in his pelt; his

nose wrinkled at the unfamiliar tang in the air. This is no place for cats, he told himself.

With a wave of his tail, Brambleclaw jumped onto

a rocky outcrop and instantly disappeared under the

edge of the cliff.



“Where did he go?” Birchfal asked, bewildered.

Lionblaze spotted the deputy’s amber eyes

glowing from the shadows at the bottom of the cliff.

“Come on!” Brambleclaw cal ed.

Reluctantly the rest of the patrol fol owed him beneath the jagged, teethlike rocks and into a low-roofed cave. Lionblaze gazed around at the pale sandy wal s and the floor strewn with large, smooth stones. High above them, gray light slanted down from a smal hole in the roof.

“Is that where you fel ?” Lionblaze guessed,

remembering how Brambleclaw had said he first

found Midnight.

Brambleclaw nodded. “The cave was ful of water,

and I nearly drowned. Your mother saved my life.”

A cold pang swept through Lionblaze, harsh as the booming water outside. She’s not my mother.

The words almost forced themselves out of his jaws,

but he bit them back. If Brambleclaw didn’t know, this wasn’t the place to tel him.

Hol yleaf hadn’t heard the exchange between

Lionblaze and Brambleclaw. She was sniffing

curiously around the cave, padding over to where the floor sloped upward at the back, turning soft and floor sloped upward at the back, turning soft and sandy. Some branches were tucked in it at the top.

“What are those doing there?” Hol yleaf asked.

“This is Midnight’s den,” Brambleclaw explained.

For the first time Lionblaze noticed the scent of badger underlying the smel of the water. His neck fur bristled, but he made himself relax. The scent was stale, and besides, Brambleclaw had told them that

Midnight was friendly to cats.

“Wil she come and find us?” Hazeltail mewed

nervously.

“I hope she does,” Hol yleaf replied. “Jayfeather told us al about her. She knows so much.”

Her green eyes flashed at Lionblaze from the

shadows. Is that what she really wants? he

wondered. Does she think Midnight can tell us who

our parents are?

“Midnight isn’t here.” Brambleclaw sounded

disappointed. “And her scent is stale, so there’s no point in waiting for her. She’s been gone for several days. We’d better get back.”

When they emerged from the cave, the water had

risen even farther up the shore. A wave crashed onto the rocks and licked over the pebbles; Lionblaze jumped back as water swirled around his paws

before retreating with a rattling hiss.

“Back to the gul y, quickly,” Brambleclaw ordered.

He took the lead as the patrol scrambled back across the rocks. Lionblaze staggered as water foamed around him as high as his bel y fur, but he managed to stay on his paws and drag himself to safety, up the steep slope of the gul y where Brambleclaw and Hazeltail had already taken refuge.

Hol yleaf dragged herself after him, her black pelt soaked and flattened to her sides from the spray.

“I hate this place!” she spat as she tried to shake

herself dry. “Midnight must be mouse-brained to live here.”

A sharp cry of alarm cut through her words. As Birchfal tried to leap up into the gul y, a huge wave crashed over him. Hol yleaf stretched out a paw, but before she could grab him, the wave swept him back

out of reach. Lionblaze caught a glimpse of him struggling in the gray water, his jaws wide in a yowl of terror, before his head went under.

“He’l drown!” Hol yleaf screeched.

At the same instant a dark shadow flashed over Lionblaze’s head; Brambleclaw had leaped down



into the water and was swimming strongly to where

Birchfal

had

disappeared.

Brackenfur,

stil

precariously balanced on the rocks below, launched

himself after the Clan deputy.

Lionblaze bunched his muscles to leap down and

join them, only to find Hol yleaf blocking his way. “You can’t,” she rasped. “More cats wil die!”

“There must be something we can do,” Lionblaze

meowed desperately.

Glancing around, he saw a straggling bush

growing between the rocks a couple of tail-lengths above them.

“Hazeltail,” he cal ed. “Can you break a branch off

that bush?”

The young she-cat was staring at the sun-drown water, frozen with horror as she watched her

Clanmates struggling in the waves. She started as Lionblaze spoke, then turned and began tugging at the longest branch.

Lionblaze scrambled up to help her. To his relief

the bush was dry; the branch cracked away from the

main trunk, so that he and Hazeltail could claw it free and drag it down the gul y to the edge of the water.

Lionblaze let out a gasp of relief when he saw that Birchfal had resurfaced; Brambleclaw had his teeth

fastened in the younger warrior’s neck fur, while Brackenfur swam on his other side, trying to push him toward the cliff.

Dropping the branch at the bottom of the gul y, Lionblaze beckoned his sister with his tail. “Grab the end,” he directed. “Sink your teeth and claws in, and don’t let go.”

Hol yleaf obeyed, pushing the branch so that it stuck out into the water as far as it would go.

Lionblaze and Hazeltail crouched beside her, al three cats hanging on to the end of the branch, trying to keep it steady among the crashing waves. More water swirled around them.

We can’t keep this up for long, Lionblaze thought

grimly. We’ll be swept away as well.

He narrowed his eyes to peer across the roaring

water and spotted his Clanmates bob above the surface as a wave drove them inshore. The short leaf-bare day was drawing to an end; the sinking sun flooded the surface of the water with scarlet so that the cats’ heads were just shadows bobbing in a sea

of blood.

The wave swept them closer stil ; Brackenfur



The wave swept them closer stil ; Brackenfur

reached out and managed to sink the claws of one

paw into the end of the branch. “Grab it!” he yowled to Birchfal .

The young tom looked frozen with fear, his eyes staring vacantly, but as Brambleclaw let go his scruff, he clutched wildly at the branch and dragged himself along it until he could scramble onto the rocks at the bottom of the gul y. Lionblaze let go of his end of the branch to haul Birchfal ’s limp body up higher; water streamed from his pelt and he vomited up a huge mouthful of liquid.

Brackenfur clawed his way along the branch to safety, and stood shaking the water out of his ginger fur. “Brambleclaw!” he yowled. “Brambleclaw, where

are you?”

Cold horror flooded over Lionblaze as he realized

that the deputy had disappeared. He can’t have drowned. What will we do without him?

Then he spotted Brambleclaw’s dark head break

the surface a couple of fox-lengths away from the end of the branch. He was trying to swim, but his efforts were much feebler now.

Waves were tugging at Hol yleaf and Hazeltail as



they clung to the branch. Hol yleaf’s tail streamed out into the water.

“Get back, but don’t let go!” Lionblaze ordered, his heart pounding as hard as the waves on the shore. Then he raised his voice to a yowl.

“Brambleclaw! Over here!”

The deputy heard him and seemed to find new

strength. Struggling to keep afloat, he let the next wave carry him up to the branch, then struck out toward it. He managed to fasten his claws into it and haul himself out before the retreating wave swept him back again.

“Fox dung!” he spat, standing on the stones of the

gul y with water eddying around his paws. “I thought I was on my way to StarClan for sure.”

The cats began to retreat from the hungry water.

Brambleclaw scrambled up the gul y until he stood beside Birchfal , who was stil slumped on the stones with his eyes closed. Only his heaving chest showed

that he was alive.

Brambleclaw prodded him with one paw.

“Birchfal ?”

The young tabby’s eyes opened and he let out a

shuddering sigh. “I might have drowned.” His voice shook with fear. “I might never have seen Whitewing

again—or our kits!”

“But you’re fine now.” Brambleclaw’s voice rasped

in his throat, rubbed raw by the bitter water. “It’s time we started moving.”





The Clan deputy didn’t al ow his patrol to rest until they reached the shal ow gul y that ran along the top of the cliff. Out of the wind, with the waves booming against the cliffs below, they could col apse and try to groom the water out of their fur. Lionblaze winced at the bitter taste of salt, and saw that his Clanmates were making faces as they licked.

“Thanks, Brambleclaw and Brackenfur,” Birchfal

mumbled. “You saved my life back there.”

Brackenfur touched the young tom’s shoulder with

the tip of his tail. “It’s al over, and thank StarClan, no cat died. Brambleclaw, what do you think we should

do next, seeing that Midnight isn’t here?”

Brambleclaw accepted his Clanmate’s tactful

change of subject with a flick of his ears. “We’l keep looking for Sol. There’l be cats in the Twolegplace who have seen him.”

The hair on Brackenfur’s neck lifted at the mention

of Sol’s name. “Yes, he had a look of kittypet about him.”

That cat’s no kittypet. Lionblaze didn’t dare say the words out loud, in case some cat asked him how

he knew so much about Sol. He exchanged a

doubtful glance with Hol yleaf. He wasn’t sure that he wanted to visit the Twolegplace, and he could tel that his sister felt the same. Hazeltail was looking nervous, too, but it was Birchfal who spoke what they were al thinking.

“Do we have to go so close to Twolegs? It’s not right for Clan cats.”

“We’ve got no choice,” Brambleclaw growled.

“We’re not going back to ThunderClan without Sol!”

I wonder whether Brambleclaw would be so keen

to hunt down Ashfur’s killer if he knew that Ashfur had tried to destroy Squirrelflight? Lionblaze

thought.

But

Brambleclaw

also

didn’t

know

that

Squirrelflight had lied to him. She let him believe he was our father. Would he be so loyal to her if he found out the truth?

Lionblaze shook his head, trying to clear it of al the lies. He had to fix his mind on the one thing he could control: being the best warrior for ThunderClan that he could possibly be. I know I can still fight without being hurt. I just need a chance to prove it….

“What’s the matter?” Hol yleaf muttered into his ear. “Have you heard something?” Her black pelt was bristling.

Lionblaze realized that he had sunk his claws into



the ground as if he were about to attack. “No, it’s okay,” he replied, forcing himself to relax. “I was just thinking about Sol.”

Brambleclaw hadn’t heard their exchange. “This is

what we’re going to do,” he announced. “There’s nowhere for cats to live near the edge of the cliff, and nowhere to catch prey. So we’l have to head for the outskirts of the Twolegplace and look for any cats who might have seen Sol.”

“So long as we stay on the outskirts,” Hol yleaf muttered.

The patrol slunk cautiously over the edge of the gul y and made for the red blur of Twoleg nests on the far side of the open stretch of cliff. Lionblaze felt thankful that the noise of crashing water was dying away behind him, though the wind stil thrust at him.

The sun had vanished, swal owed up by the sun-

drown-place, and shadows were stretching across the grass. Lionblaze’s stomach growled, and he remembered that he hadn’t had so much as a sniff of

fresh-kil since early that morning.

“We’l look for prey as soon as we get to the Twolegplace,” Brackenfur promised when he heard the rumble of Lionblaze’s bel y.



the rumble of Lionblaze’s bel y.

And what sort of prey will we find there? Lionblaze

wondered. I’m not eating kittypet food!

As they drew closer to the Twoleg nests,

Lionblaze grew more and more anxious; he could tel

from his Clanmates’ bristling fur and flickering glances that they felt the same. Something black swooped down on them with a high-pitched

chittering sound; Lionblaze threw himself to the ground and rol ed over, his teeth bared and his claws extended, in time to spot a bat fluttering away and vanishing into the growing darkness.

Birchfal suppressed a smal mrrow of laughter. “I wish you’d caught it,” he mewed. “Then we might al

have had a bite to eat.”

“A pretty smal bite for the six of us,” Lionblaze growled.

Lights were beginning to appear in the Twoleg nests, and the sky above them was lit by an eerie orange glow. Lionblaze wrinkled his nose against the strange scents and felt his neck fur bristle at the harsh, unfamiliar sounds.

Beside him, Hol yleaf’s eyes were glowing and

her tail was fluffed out to twice its size. Even Brambleclaw and Brackenfur were moving more

cautiously as the huge Twoleg dens loomed up

ahead.

“I don’t think Sol lives with Twolegs,” Brambleclaw

meowed, “so we’re more likely to find him—or cats

who have seen him—near the edge.”

He led the way across a stretch of softer grass, and halted in front of a tal fence made out of flat strips of wood. Lionblaze tasted the air; among many smel s he couldn’t identify, he picked up the scents of Twoleg and dog.

“Each Twoleg nest has a smal piece of territory attached to it,” Brambleclaw explained. “It’s enclosed by a fence made of wood or red stones. I think that’s the Twoleg way of marking their borders.”

“How does he know so much about it?” Hol yleaf

muttered suspiciously.

“There was a Twolegplace in the old forest,”

Brackenfur told her. “Right up against our territory.

Don’t you remember the story of how Firestar

wandered away from his Twolegs and met

Graystripe in the forest?”

Hol yleaf shrugged. “I guess.”

Brambleclaw led the way alongside the fence,



toward a gap that was flooded by orange light.

Before they reached it, loud barking exploded from the other side of the fence; Lionblaze jumped as two dogs slammed their bodies against the flimsy wood.

He exchanged an alarmed glance with Hol yleaf.

What if the fence gives way?

“Run!” Brambleclaw yowled.

The patrol bolted along the fence and swerved through the gap. As soon as he set paw on the hard

black stone at the end of the fence, Lionblaze was engulfed in a beam of piercing white light. A monster was charging straight for them!

Some cat let out a screech of terror. For a heartbeat, Lionblaze spotted his Clanmates outlined

against the glare from the monster’s eyes. Then he

leaped back to the side of the Thunderpath, landing

with a thump in the middle of some thorns.

When he dared to look up, the monster had

slowed down and was turning into a gap behind one

of the Twoleg nests. Sharp orange light shone down

from tal stone trees standing in lines along both sides of the Thunderpath. Just opposite, Lionblaze spotted Birchfal sprawled at the foot of the fence, and Brackenfur balanced on top of it, his back arched and his tail straight up and bristling. Hol yleaf and Brambleclaw emerged side by side from the deep shadows under a tree.

“Birchfal ?” Lionblaze cal ed softly. “Are you

okay?”

To his relief, the young tabby tom scrambled to his

paws and gave his whiskers a shake. “I’ve got al the warriors in StarClan inside my head,” he meowed.

“That thing was fierce!”

The thorns where Lionblaze had landed grew

beside another gap in the Twoleg fence. His bel y lurched when he spotted another monster in front of

the Twoleg den. Then his breathing steadied and his

heart slowed down as he realized that this monster

was asleep.

On the other side of the gap, a shiny Twoleg thing

had tipped over, spil ing out a pile of rubbish.

Lionblaze’s nose wrinkled at the scent of crow-food.

Then the heap heaved and Hazeltail emerged from the middle of it, shaking debris from her pelt.

“I knocked the thing over,” she complained, “and now I’m covered with al this yucky stuff.”

Lionblaze padded across to help her. Clinging to

her pelt were scraps of something that smel ed like a her pelt were scraps of something that smel ed like a plant, but they were cold and slimy, like herbs picked and left in the rain to rot. Cautiously he stretched out a paw to knock them off; Hol yleaf and Brambleclaw

bounded up to help.

“They taste vile.” Hazeltail licked her shoulder and swiped her tongue around her lips as if she was trying to get rid of a disgusting taste. “I’d rather eat fox dung.”

Brackenfur padded up and stood at the edge of the Thunderpath, keeping watch for more monsters.

His fur stil hadn’t settled down; Lionblaze noticed that Brambleclaw looked just as ruffled as he helped Hazeltail clean her pelt.

Seeing the senior warriors’ confidence shaken

made Lionblaze feel a bit braver. “There can’t have

been dogs in the Twolegplace near the old forest,”

he murmured to Hol yleaf. “Even Brambleclaw was surprised.”

“I wonder what else wil surprise us,” Hol yleaf responded.

Meanwhile Birchfal had crossed the Thunderpath

and was nosing around in the heap of debris that had fal en out of the shiny Twoleg thing. “Hey, look at this!” he meowed. “Brambleclaw, can we eat it?”

Lionblaze wasn’t sure at first what his Clanmate was dragging out of the pile of rubbish. It was smooth and pale and smel ed a little like fresh-kil , though it was no kind of prey that he had ever seen

before. The stink of Twolegs clung to it as wel ; Lionblaze knew he didn’t want to eat it, but at the same time his bel y growled at the thought of food.

Brambleclaw sniffed the thing careful y and

nibbled a bit from one side. “It tastes a bit like blackbird,” he reported after a moment. “I don’t think it wil hurt us to eat it, and we need food.”

“I guess that means he doesn’t think we’l catch much prey around here,” Hol yleaf whispered into Lionblaze’s ear.

Brambleclaw clawed the Twoleg prey into fair

shares for each cat. Birchfal checked the rubbish again, but he didn’t find any more prey.

“This isn’t bad,” Lionblaze mumbled to Hol yleaf around a mouthful of the stuff, “if you ignore the scent of Twolegs.”

Hol yleaf was crouched over her share, eating it in

neat, rapid bites. “Huh! Give me a good plump vole

any day.”



With the edge taken off his hunger, Lionblaze felt

stronger, but as Brambleclaw led them farther into the Twolegplace, he started to feel trapped. The red stone nests reared up on either side, closer than the wal s of the hol ow and higher than the trees in the forest. His pads ached from walking on the hard stone. How can any cat live here?

The orange glare from the stone trees cast the cats’ shadows huge and wavering on the wal beside

them as they slunk along the edge of the

Thunderpath. Suddenly Hol yleaf stiffened, flicking out her tail to touch Brambleclaw on the shoulder.

“There’s something up ahead!” she hissed.

Lionblaze froze as Brambleclaw raised his tail for

the patrol to halt. He half expected the roar of another monster, but nothing broke the silence except for the patter of approaching paws.

Hazeltail drew closer to his side; Lionblaze could

feel her pelt quivering. “What if it’s a dog?” she murmured.

“Then we fight it.” Lionblaze flexed his claws.

He relaxed with a sigh as a smal black-and-white

cat appeared from around the next corner. It halted and stared at the patrol in horror, its back arched and every hair on its pelt standing on end.

Almost immediately the newcomer started to back

away, its terrified gaze stil fixed on the forest cats.

Before it could turn and flee, Brambleclaw took a single pace forward.

“We’re not going to hurt you,” he cal ed, lifting one forepaw to show his claws were sheathed. “We just

want to talk to you.”

“That’s what he said!” The little cat looked almost frightened out of its fur. “And look what happened!”

Before Brambleclaw could ask what it meant, the

black-and-white cat spun and fled back around the corner where it came from. Brambleclaw launched himself after it, with the whole patrol hard on his paws, but when they rounded the corner, the

Thunderpath was empty. Nothing moved under the harsh orange light.

“Mouse dung!” Brambleclaw spoke through gritted

teeth.

“What in the name of StarClan was he talking about?” Brackenfur asked, looking mystified.

Lionblaze exchanged a glance with Hol yleaf. He could see she shared the idea that had instantly flashed into his mind: Sol!



flashed into his mind: Sol!

“I wonder who ‘he’ is,” Brambleclaw mused aloud,

his ears twitching as he surveyed the silent

Thunderpath. “Could it be Sol, do you think?”

“I bet a moon of dawn patrols it is!” Birchfal mewed excitedly.

“We don’t look anything like Sol,” Brambleclaw continued, his tone thoughtful. “But we’re strangers, just as Sol must have been.”

“And what happened?” Hazeltail shivered. “From

the way that cat behaved, it must have been

something bad.”

No cat replied. Lionblaze’s bel y fluttered. His Clanmates were looking edgy, their eyes wide with fear, as if they expected to find Sol under the next fal en leaf.

Final y Brambleclaw broke the silence. “It’s too late to go on looking now. Let’s get some rest and start a proper search in the morning.”

He led the way back around the corner and along

the Thunderpath, past the fence where the dogs had

tried to attack. Everything was quiet now, though the scent of dog was stil strong; Lionblaze slid out his claws, ready to rip them along the vicious creatures’



pelts. But there was no sound from behind the fence.

Eventual y they reached the stretch of soft grass and trees they had crossed on their way to the

Twolegplace.

Lionblaze and Hol yleaf settled into a makeshift den among the roots of one of the trees; the rest of the patrol found places nearby.

“I’m so tired my paws could drop off,” Hol yleaf mumbled, stretching her jaws in a huge yawn.

“Mine, too.” Lionblaze had been afraid that his worries and the strangeness of their surroundings would keep him awake, but when his aching body curled up among the dead leaves, he felt exhaustion

pressing on him like a heavy pelt. As he drifted into sleep, he could stil hear the distant roaring of the sun-drown-place.





CHAPTER 9





Jayfeather woke when a cold breeze ruffled his fur.



“We need more bedding in here,” he grumbled to himself as he scrambled out of his bare nest. “It’s as drafty as sleeping on top of the ridge in WindClan territory!”

He lifted his head to sniff the scents of early morning. There was a strong tang of herbs in the air; as Jayfeather bent his head to give his pelt a quick grooming, he located Leafpool in front of the storage cave. She was making up leaf wraps of tansy, and beside her there was a fresh mixture of juniper berries and daisy leaves to ease the pain of Mousefur’s aching joints.

“Should I take those for you?” Jayfeather offered,

padding up behind his mentor.

Leafpool jumped. “Don’t creep up on me like that!

You frightened me out of my fur.” She careful y patted the herbs together, then added, “No, I can manage. I want you to go over to the nursery and check every

cat there, and the bedding, for fleas. I spotted Briarkit scratching yesterday.”

Jayfeather turned away, resentment seething

beneath his skin. “Am I a medicine cat or an apprentice?” he muttered, loud enough for Leafpool

to hear, but the she-cat did not respond.



He cal ed a greeting as he pushed through the brambles into the nursery, and then he started to check for fleas.

“Oh, thank you, Jayfeather,” Mil ie meowed. “I’m sure I’ve a couple in my pelt somewhere. It’l be such a relief to get rid of them.”

“You need a change of bedding,” Jayfeather told her, tracking down a flea in Briarkit’s neck fur and spearing it with a claw. “I’l get Foxpaw and Icepaw to deal with it.” Unless Leafpool expects me to do that as well, he added grumpily to himself.

“Right, you’re done,” he told Briarkit. “Blossomkit, I’l —”

He broke off with a startled yelp as claws stabbed

into his tail. Wrenching it free, he spun around and picked up the scent of Toadkit.

“I pretended your tail was a mouse,” the little tom

told him proudly. “I caught it, too!”

Jayfeather bared his teeth. “Just keep your claws

to yourself!”

“There’s no need for that,” Daisy protested. “He was only playing.”

Jayfeather bit back a sharp retort and went to check Blossomkit and Bumblekit for fleas. Toadkit wriggled away from Daisy and bounced up to him, interest sparking from him as Jayfeather parted Blossomkit’s pelt.

“Can you eat fleas?” he mewed. “Do they taste yucky?”

“Why don’t you try one and find out?” Jayfeather suggested.

“You be a flea and I’l eat you!” Blossomkit squeaked, pul ing away from Jayfeather and leaping

on top of Toadkit. Jayfeather staggered as the two wrestling kits piled into him.

“Stop that!” he snarled. “Blossomkit, do you want

your fleas fixed or don’t you?”

The little tortoiseshel kit instantly broke away from the play fight and stood quietly in front of Jayfeather again. Toadkit pushed up close to them; Jayfeather

could feel the kit’s breath on his ear.

“Do you like being a medicine cat?” Toadkit

asked. “I wouldn’t want to do it if you only get to look for fleas.”

StarClan, give me patience! “That’s not al

medicine cats do,” Jayfeather replied through

clenched teeth. “We have to know about herbs and

—”



—”

“Do you think I’d be a good medicine cat?”

Toadkit persisted. “I’d be good at finding herbs. I can scent out anything. Can I be a medicine cat? Can I?”

“You’l be lucky to make warrior if you don’t shut up,” Jayfeather muttered.

“Daisy!” Toadkit let out a wail as he scampered away through the bracken that covered the floor of the nursery. “Daisy, Jayfeather was mean to me!”

“Honestly, Jayfeather!” Daisy’s irritated voice

came from the other side of the den. “I think you’ve got ants in your fur this morning. You should go away and come back later when you can be more

pleasant.”

Jayfeather ignored her, and went on searching for

fleas in gloomy silence. He wanted Hol yleaf and Lionblaze to come back. They belonged together—

especial y now, when they had no idea where they had been born, who their parents were, or why Squirrelflight had lied to them for so long.





When Jayfeather final y left the nursery, he paused

for a few heartbeats, letting out a long sigh as the weak rays of the leaf-bare sun soaked into his fur. A paw step behind him and the scent of his Clan leader made him turn.

“Good morning, Jayfeather,” Firestar meowed.

There was concern in his voice. “Are you okay? Any

problems?”

“I’m fine.” Jayfeather dipped his head awkwardly.

He didn’t want to tel his leader that al his problems came from his Clanmates. After al , Firestar had never lied to him, as far as he knew.

He felt a pang of regret that he didn’t share his Clan leader’s blood after al . His respect for the flame-colored tom had nothing to do with the

prophecy, and everything to do with the way Firestar led his Clan, even losing a life to greencough for their sake.

“Good,” Firestar murmured. Jayfeather sensed



that the Clan leader didn’t entirely believe him. “You know, you can always tel me if there’s anything bothering you.”

“Yes…fine.”

Jayfeather

felt

even

more

uncomfortable. Firestar, you don’t want to know the

things I could tell you!

To his relief, Firestar padded off toward the fresh-

kil pile. Left alone at the edge of the hol ow, Jayfeather scanned the clearing. He located

Mousefur and Longtail sharing tongues outside their

den, and heard the skinny brown elder complain,

“Leaf-bare was never as cold as this in the old forest.”

Outside the apprentice den, Foxpaw and Icepaw

were trying out a new fighting move; Jayfeather reminded himself to tel them about the nursery bedding. Cloudtail and Brightheart were padding toward the thorn tunnel. “I think we should try for prey near the old Twoleg nest,” Cloudtail suggested.

“Stupid furbal !” Brightheart’s voice was ful of affection. “We scared off al the prey when the cats with greencough stayed there.”

“There’s been time for them to come back….”

Their friendly bickering died away as they left the camp.

In spite of the feeble warmth of the sun, cold pierced Jayfeather through and through. He had never felt so alone. Rock had told him that the answers lay with his Clanmates. But what if I don’t have Clanmates?

“Do I have to do this?” Jayfeather protested as he

emerged from the trees into the mossy clearing where the apprentices trained. “It’s a waste of time when we have to look for herbs.”

“The herbs won’t run away,” Leafpool responded tartly. “You know as wel as I do that every cat gets basic fight training, even medicine cats.”

Jayfeather bit back another complaint. He hated learning to fight, because he knew he would never be any good at it. But there was no point in arguing with Leafpool; she always seemed to be in a bad mood these days.

“Right,” Leafpool began, leading the way into the

center of the clearing. “Let’s start with some defensive moves. I’m going to attack you, and I want you to dodge to one side and get a blow in as I pass you.”

“Okay,” Jayfeather muttered. “The sooner we start,



the—ow!”

While he was speaking, Leafpool leaped past him

and landed a stinging blow on his ear.

“I wasn’t ready!” he yowled.

“You think a ShadowClan warrior is going to give

you any warning? You have to be alert all the time, Jayfeather.”

On the last words, Leafpool sprang at him again.

This time Jayfeather was more prepared; he jumped

to one side and swiped at where he thought his mentor was, but his paw barely grazed her pelt.

“Better,” Leafpool admitted. “But not good

enough. Let’s do it again.”

Jayfeather managed to land a blow or two, but his

paws felt heavy and clumsy, and his senses weren’t

as sharp as usual. Even though his mentor kept her

blows light and her claws sheathed, he began to feel battered and exhausted. Final y, as he leaped aside, he lost his balance on a rough patch of ground and

col apsed, paws flailing, without touching Leafpool at al .

“I’m over here, Jayfeather.” Leafpool’s voice came

from the opposite side of the clearing. “Honestly, you’ve got no more fighting sense than a baby you’ve got no more fighting sense than a baby rabbit! I don’t think you’re trying at al .”

“I am!” Jayfeather spat.

“I know what your problem is.” His mentor’s voice

was cold. “You expect Lionblaze and Hol yleaf to protect you, so you can’t be bothered to learn to defend yourself.”

“That’s not true!”

“I think it is. But Lionblaze and Hol yleaf won’t always be around. They’re not around now. You need

to be able to look after yourself.”

Jayfeather didn’t reply. She doesn’t understand, he thought mutinously, as he scrambled up and tried

to shake the moss out of his pelt. It’s not the same for her and Squirrelflight. If they were so close, she’d know Squirrelflight lied about us being her kits. Leafpool would never have let her do

something like that. I wonder what she’d do if she knew what her sister was really like?





Jayfeather limped back to the medicine cats’ den

through the damp scents of twilight. His legs ached

and his head throbbed where he had grazed it col iding with a tree. He was too exhausted to look for any herbs to treat himself. “I hope Leafpool’s happy,” he grumbled as he curled up in his nest. “I’l probably be too stiff to do anything tomorrow.”

He closed his eyes—and then opened them a

heartbeat later to find himself in deep, lush forest, with starlight dancing on the leaves. His aches and pains had vanished and a warm, scent-laden breeze

soothed his fur. Leaf-bare in the waking forest was only a distant memory.

A narrow path wound ahead of him through

arching clumps of fern. Jayfeather began to fol ow it, ears pricked as he glanced around for any familiar cats. He could hear rustling in the undergrowth on either side and he caught glimpses of furry pelts, as if there were cats al around him, but none of them emerged to greet him.



“Who’s there?” he cal ed out. “Yel owfang?

Bluestar? Can any cat hear me?”

There was no reply. Becoming more frustrated

with every paw step, Jayfeather fol owed the track until it reached a clearing covered with soft grass. A smal pool was at the center, reflecting the stars.

There were stil no cats in sight.

“Where are you?” Jayfeather wailed, stepping out

into the open. “Why won’t you talk to me?”

Fronds of bracken dipped and rustled at the

opposite side of the clearing, and Spottedleaf appeared. Jayfeather’s rush of relief died when he saw how warily she was regarding him, her tail kinked high over her back.

“Spottedleaf…?” he began uncertainly.

“We can’t give you the answers you’re seeking,”

the tortoiseshel she-cat interrupted. “Go back to your Clan. That is where the truth lies.”

“But—you must tel me more than that!” Jayfeather

begged. “Did StarClan know al along that

Squirrelflight and Brambleclaw weren’t our parents?”

Anger flared in Spottedleaf’s green eyes. “When wil you realize that StarClan doesn’t know

everything?”

she

snarled,

lashing

her

tail.



“Sometimes we have questions, too! Sometimes

we’re just cats, like you!”

Without giving Jayfeather a chance to reply, she whipped around and vanished into the ferns.

Jayfeather sprang forward to pursue her, only to feel the ground give way beneath his paws. He jolted awake in his own den, opening his eyes onto

darkness. He stretched his jaws wide, longing to wail like a kit abandoned by its mother.

They’ve all left me: Hollyleaf and Lionblaze, all

the rest of my Clanmates, and now StarClan as well. I’m completely alone.

Even his belief in the prophecy, which had once seemed to promise so much, had been built on a lie.

I may as well be blind in my sleep, too. What am

I going to do now?





CHAPTER 10





Hollyleaf shifted uneasily in the makeshift nest under the tree roots. Beside her, Lionblaze’s ears and tail were twitching, as if his sleep was disturbed by dark dreams. Hol yleaf wasn’t sure how he

managed to sleep at al , so close to the

Twolegplace. Even in the middle of the night, monsters growled, Twolegs shrieked, and dogs

barked.

I’ve never been in such a noisy place, she

thought, trying to find a comfortable spot among the dead leaves. How do the kittypets stand it?

Toward dawn she slipped into a fitful doze, only to



be woken again as Lionblaze scrambled out of the nest. Yawning hugely, Hol yleaf fol owed him.

The orange glow in the sky above the

Twolegplace had given way to the pale light of dawn; the roofs of the Twoleg dens were black outlines against the sky. A cold breeze was blowing, and every blade of grass was edged with frost.

Brambleclaw and the other Clan cats stood gazing across the grass to the outlying dens of the Twolegplace.

“We need to go back into the Twolegplace,”

Brambleclaw began, “and look for that cat we met last night. He has to explain what he meant.”

Hazeltail’s whiskers twitched nervously. “They

obviously don’t like strangers around here.”

Birchfal touched her ear with his nose. “There are

enough of us here to outnumber a few jumpy

kittypets!”

Hol yleaf exchanged a glance with her brother. “I think we’re on Sol’s trail,” Lionblaze murmured, clawing at the grass. “I’l bet you the fattest vole on the fresh-kil pile that he’s the reason that black-and-white cat was so scared of us.”

Hol yleaf nodded. Curiosity gave her more



confidence as she fol owed Brambleclaw back

across the grass and into the gap between the Twoleg nests. She could see that her Clanmates felt

the same, padding along with bright eyes and tails held high. We’re warriors! she reminded herself. We don’t have to be afraid of anything.

The breeze strengthened to a bitterly cold wind that swept through the world of hard, red stone as the patrol padded deeper into the Twolegplace. There was barely enough light to make out the right direction, and no sun to melt the ice that covered the puddles beside the Thunderpath.

“I’m so thirsty!” Hol yleaf whimpered. “My tongue feels like a mouse’s pelt.”

While Brambleclaw paused to taste the air, she crouched down beside one of the puddles and

touched the ice with her tongue, grateful for the tingling freshness.

“Come on,” the Clan deputy meowed. “This way.”

Hol yleaf tried to jump up, only to stop with a strangled cry of dismay. Her tongue had frozen to the ice; a sharp pain shot through it as she tried to wrench herself free.

“What’s the matter?” Lionblaze asked.



“My tongue…” Hol yleaf could hardly get the words

out. “It’th thtuck!”

Lionblaze snorted as he suppressed a mrrow of

laughter. Birchfal stooped down until he was nose to nose with Hol yleaf; irritation swel ed inside her when she saw amusement dancing in his eyes.

“It’th not funny!” she mumbled as clearly as she could with her tongue plastered to the ice.

“Stand back.” Brackenfur’s calm voice came from

behind Hol yleaf. “Let me have a look.” He leaned beside Birchfal , gently shouldering the younger cat out of the way. “Wel , you’re certainly stuck,” he went on. Hol yleaf could tel that he was struggling not to laugh, too. “I suppose we could break off the ice.

Then you’d have to carry it until it melts.”

“Hey, you’ve discovered a new way to fetch water

for the elders!” Hazeltail put in.

Her pelt itching with frustration, Hol yleaf tried again to wrench her tongue free, only getting another stab of pain for her efforts. “It hurt-th! Do thomething!”

She pictured herself crouched on the hard ground

with her tongue stretched out, and suddenly she felt laughter bubbling up inside her. I guess I do look pretty funny. She couldn’t remember the last time pretty funny. She couldn’t remember the last time she had found anything to laugh at.

“Hol yleaf.” Brambleclaw was at her side; his

amber eyes sparkled, but his voice was gentle as he

touched his nose to her ear. “Breathe out hard. Your warm breath should melt the ice.”

He crouched down next to her and let out a long

breath at the patch of ice where she was stuck. A trickle of warmth spread through Hol yleaf; it was good to be cared for. But the warm feeling turned to ice as Brambleclaw broke off to add, “You know, you’re just like your mother. She was always getting stuck in things, too.”

She’s not my mother!

Hol yleaf let out a fierce breath and tugged at her

tongue again, gasping as it came free at last. The frozen puddle was glossy with melted water where Brambleclaw had breathed on it. But she wasn’t going to thank him. “Right,” she meowed,

straightening up. “I’m okay. Let’s—”

She broke off as a low growl sounded behind her.

Every cat spun around. A couple of fox-lengths away, a line of dogs was standing on the other side of the Thunderpath, blocking their way. There were five of them, al different shapes, from a smal , rough-coated brown-and-white one to a huge black-and-tan

brute. Vicious hatred glared out of their eyes.

Hol yleaf heard Hazeltail whisper, “Oh, no…”

“Back away.” Brambleclaw’s voice was quiet but steady. “Don’t turn and run.”

Fear froze Hol yleaf’s paws to the ground harder than the ice had trapped her tongue. She couldn’t move. It was too easy to imagine the dogs’ teeth ripping into her pelt, her blood streaming out….

She staggered as Lionblaze gave her a hard

nudge. “Come on!” he hissed.

Suddenly Hol yleaf found she could move again.

Al her instincts were screeching at her to turn and flee, but she forced herself to retreat paw step by paw step; the line of dogs advanced, keeping the same distance between them and the cats. The big

black-and-tan dog opened its jaws to show dripping

yel ow teeth. A drawn-out snarl came from its throat.

Not much farther, Hol yleaf told herself. Once

we’re away from this Twolegplace, we can climb the

trees.

Then every hair on her pelt stood on end as she

heard another growl from behind. Glancing over her



shoulder, she saw that two more dogs had

appeared, cutting off their escape route. They looked as vicious as the first dogs, with gaping jaws and lol ing tongues.

“We’re fresh-kil ,” Birchfal murmured.

At the same instant, the first set of dogs leaped forward.

“Run!” Brambleclaw yowled.

His hind legs pumping, he headed for a narrow gap with Twoleg nests on one side and a high wooden fence on the other. Hol yleaf and the rest of her Clanmates raced after him, with the dogs yelping at their paws. Hol yleaf had never been more terrified in her life, not even when Ashfur had held them prisoner on the burning cliff top. She expected sharp yel ow teeth to pierce her flank at any moment. Her

paws felt as if they were on fire from running on the hard stone, and her breath tore from her chest.

Lionblaze was pelting along beside her, his fur fluffed up so he looked twice his normal size.

Hol yleaf knew that he wanted to turn and face the dogs. No! They’ll tear you apart!

“Don’t leave me!” she gasped between panting

breaths.



Yet more dogs appeared ahead of them,

crowding down the narrow al ey. Brambleclaw

swerved through another gap onto a path between thick hedges; his Clanmates stayed hard on his paws, but the dogs were catching up.

Hol yleaf realized that their enemies were running

steadily, not putting out al their strength, as they waited for the cats to tire so they could be picked off easily. That’s how Crowfeather taught Breezepaw to

catch rabbits, when we were on the journey to the mountains, she recal ed. But we’re the prey now!

Suddenly Brambleclaw halted and squeezed

through a narrow gap at the foot of the hedge, his hind paws scrabbling as he forced his body through.

“Come on!” he panted. “They can’t fol ow us through

here!”

Brackenfur shoved Hazeltail through next, then

Birchfal . “Hol yleaf—quick!” he meowed.

Hol yleaf didn’t want to leave her brother, but there was no time to argue. She pushed her way through

the prickly bushes; Brackenfur fol owed and

Lionblaze scrambled after him, so quickly that he left some of his golden fur behind on the thorns.

“Mangy crow-food-eaters!” he yowled back



“Mangy crow-food-eaters!” he yowled back

through the hedge.

Her chest heaving, Hol yleaf glanced around. She

was standing on a smooth stretch of bright green grass, surrounded by low-growing bushes. At one side was a Twoleg den; al the doors and windows

were shut, and there was no sign of any Twolegs.

“Maybe now we can—” Brambleclaw began.

He broke off, and Hol yleaf stared in horror as she

saw that the hedge stopped near the wal of the Twoleg nest, leaving just a low wooden fence to fil the gap. The dogs were leaping effortlessly over the fence, and bounding across the grass toward the patrol. Their eyes were gleaming with hunger and scorn, and their growls had changed to joyful yelping.

They’re enjoying this! Hol yleaf realized as she turned to flee.

Suddenly the door to the den burst open. A

Twoleg rushed out, screeching and shaking a long stick at the dogs. Another Twoleg fol owed with a yowl, something shiny in his hands. He swung it toward the dogs; water cascaded out of it, but the dogs just shook it off.

The far side of the Twoleg territory was also bordered by a wooden fence. Brambleclaw raced

toward it, waving his tail for the others to fol ow.

Breathlessly they scrambled up the slippery wood.

Hazeltail started to slip back; Brackenfur gave her a shove from below, and Brambleclaw grabbed her

scruff to haul her the rest of the way. Hol yleaf realized as she clambered to safety that her paws had left smears of blood on the wood.

For a few heartbeats the dogs jostled one another

at the foot of the fence, whining and scrabbling as they tried to reach the cats. Brambleclaw gazed down at them, his back arched and his fur bristling with a mixture of terror and anger. “Leave us alone, flea-pelts!” he hissed.

Suddenly the huge black-and-tan dog broke away

from the rest and raced back across the grass to the low part of the fence near the den. The rest of the pack streamed after him and began jumping, back into the al ey.

“They’re coming to get us!” Birchfal gasped.

“We can’t stay here.” Brambleclaw’s voice was

tense. “Fol ow me.”

He leaped down as the first of the dogs appeared

around the corner, and took off down the al ey, his tail streaming out behind him and his bel y fur brushing the stones. Hol yleaf and the others pelted after him.

We can’t keep this up much longer! Hol yleaf

thought.

Brambleclaw swerved into another gap and

immediately halted. The rest of the patrol piled into his back. Hol yleaf gazed ahead, terror pounding through her. This al ey was a dead end. Straight in front of them was a high wal built of the same red stone as the Twoleg nests, and almost as tal . We’ll never climb that!

Brambleclaw leaped up at the wal but fel back, his straining paws nowhere near the top. Hol yleaf knew that Hazeltail would never manage it. And the

hedge on either side looked too thick to get through.

“You go on,” Hazeltail mewed bravely, even

though she was shaking with fear. “Don’t worry about me.”

Brackenfur touched her shoulder with his tail-tip.

“We can’t keep going,” he murmured. “We’re al too

exhausted. There’s nowhere left to go.”

“What about there?” Hol yleaf had spotted a group

of tal , shiny objects like very smooth boulders, standing together in one corner. Scents of Twoleg rubbish hung around them. She gestured toward

them with her tail. “We can hide.”

Brackenfur glanced around for other cover, but there was none. He nodded swiftly. “Go!”

Brambleclaw guided Hazeltail into hiding and

shoved Birchfal after her into the narrow space beside the shiny boulders. Hol yleaf and Lionblaze fol owed, leaving Brackenfur and Brambleclaw to crouch on the outskirts of the space, their ears and whiskers twitching as they waited for the dogs to appear.

Hol yleaf was crowded up against Hazeltail; she could feel her Clanmate trembling and hear the whimpers of terror that she tried to stifle.

“I know I’l never see my kits,” Birchfal murmured.

“I just hope Whitewing is okay.”

Pounding footsteps and loud yelping announced

that the dogs had reached the al ey. Hol yleaf could smel their stink even over the scents of the Twoleg rubbish. I guess that means they’ll be able to scent us, too.

Then she felt Lionblaze pushing his way past her,

toward the opening where Brackenfur and



toward the opening where Brackenfur and

Brambleclaw were crouching. With a shock like a rush of icy water, she realized that he was going out to fight the dogs.

“No! You can’t!” she hissed.

“I can!” Lionblaze insisted, turning glowing amber

eyes on her. “I won’t get hurt, you know I won’t.”

He pushed his way to the edge of the silver boulder,

squeezing

past

Brambleclaw

and

Brackenfur, and ignoring the Clan deputy when he asked what in StarClan’s name Lionblaze thought he

was doing.

“Lionblaze, no!” Hol yleaf screeched. “Stop!”





CHAPTER 11





Lionblaze heard his sister screeching, but he

ignored it. He knew, with every hair on his pelt, that he could fight the dogs. He could feel his blood pumping hot and fierce through his veins, and every

fighting move he had ever learned was at his claw-

tips.



The dogs seemed to approach in slow motion. He

had al the time he needed to watch the drool waving from their lips and their paws pounding over the ground. His gaze flicked from one to another.

I’ll take out that black-and-tan one first. When it

falls, it’ll trip the thin gray one, and the white one too, if I’m lucky. Then I’ll go for that yapping little horror with the black paws….

He was dimly aware that his Clanmates were

yowling behind him, but he stil didn’t respond. This is my fight. I’m the only one who can save them!

Lionblaze braced himself to leap, spotting the surprise in the leading dog’s yel ow eyes. “You didn’t think a cat would turn and fight!” he taunted. “Wel , now’s your chance to learn!”

His last words were drowned by a shattering

crash; he glanced behind to see that one of the silver boulders had toppled over, sending a silver disc spinning across the ground. It rol ed into the pack of dogs; they swerved to avoid it, the rush of their attack halted.

To Lionblaze’s surprise, a dark brown tabby she-

cat popped up from behind the fal en boulder, closer to the fence than the terrified Clan cats were.



“Quick!” she meowed. “Help me push this one over.”

She reared up, resting her forepaws against the side of the next shiny boulder. Brambleclaw sprang

up beside her, and together they pushed. The

boulder crashed over like the other one, the silver disc on top of it spinning away. Twoleg rubbish spil ed out from inside.

The dogs were yelping in frustration, scrabbling at

the boulders in their efforts to get around them and sink their jaws into their prey.

“Come on!” the strange she-cat ordered. “It won’t

hold them off for long.”

She dove through a narrow gap at the bottom of

the hedge that had been hidden by the silver boulders, and the patrol fol owed her at ful pelt, racing across a wide stretch of pale gray stone.

Renewed barking made Lionblaze glance over

his shoulder as he fled. The smal brown-and-white dog and the thin gray one had pushed their way through the gap and were bounding across the

expanse of stone.

“They’re coming!” he gasped.

“This way!” the she-cat mewed tersely. She led them down a narrow path between two high fences



and halted beside a smal hole with jagged edges.

“Through there.”

Birchfal bundled through first, fol owed by

Hazeltail and Hol yleaf, and Lionblaze squeezed through after them. He let out a yowl of alarm as he crashed hind legs over head into brittle grass. Head spinning, he staggered to his paws to see

Brambleclaw already beside him and the strange she-cat scrambling through the hole.

“Brackenfur?” he asked anxiously.

A screech answered him as the ginger tom

hauled himself through the fence, paws flailing as he tugged at his tail. “Fox dung!” he gasped, col apsing on the grass. “That flea-ridden brute bit me!”

Brambleclaw gave his Clanmate’s tail a quick

sniff; Lionblaze could see that some of Brackenfur’s fur had been stripped off, but there didn’t seem to be any blood.

“You’l be okay,” the deputy decided. “Where

now?”

The she-cat’s reply was drowned out by a flurry of

barking. The fence creaked and bent as the dogs flung themselves against it.

In the Twoleg nests around them, lights began to



In the Twoleg nests around them, lights began to

appear in the dark holes in the wal s. Lionblaze heard a Twoleg shouting angrily, but the dogs went

on barking and pounding at the fence. His bel y lurched when he saw that the smal brown-and-white

dog had stuck its head through the gap and the wood around it was starting to splinter.

The dark tabby she-cat darted forward and

slashed her claws at the dog’s nose. Yelping, it pul ed back.

“That’l teach you,” she meowed with satisfaction.

To the cats she added, “Quick, fol ow me!”

They raced after her to the entrance of a Twoleg

nest. Brambleclaw skidded to a halt.

“We can’t go in there!” he protested. “It’s a Twoleg nest.”

“Fine!” the tabby snapped. “Stay out here and get

eaten.” She squeezed through the skinny gap at the

side of the flat piece of wood blocking the opening

and disappeared.

Brambleclaw and the rest of the patrol exchanged

confused glances; then the deputy shrugged and raised his tail, signaling his Clanmates to fol ow.

Lionblaze paused to look back across the grass, and saw that the smal dog was stil scrabbling at the gap. It had managed to get its shoulders and one paw through the hole.

Lionblaze felt his fur bristle and grow hot again as he braced himself to fight. He could almost taste the blood and hear the terrified yelping as his claws ripped into his enemies’ pelts.

Then he heard a crash and a Twoleg shouting; it

sounded much closer than before. The dogs’ fierce

barking turned to frightened yelps; the little dog struggled backward to free itself from the hole in the fence, then vanished.

Lionblaze’s fur lay flat again as the noise died away. He started to feel disappointed that he hadn’t managed to try out his battle skil s against the dogs, then jumped as Brackenfur nudged him.

“Come on,” mewed the ginger tom, angling his

ears toward the entrance to the nest. “What are you

waiting for?”

The other cats had already gone inside. Lionblaze

pushed his way through the gap, with Brackenfur close behind him. He found himself in a smal , straight-sided den; his Clanmates huddled together in the middle, casting nervous glances around them.



He tasted the air: There was a strong scent of cat, but only a very faint, stale trace of Twoleg.

“That’s unusual,” he began. “Why…?”

The brown tabby she-cat paid no attention to him.

“This way,” she mewed briskly. “Since you’re here, you may as wel meet the others.”

She led the way through an archway into a larger

den. Light streamed into it from a long slit in the wal .

As Lionblaze padded hesitantly forward, the smel of cats grew overpoweringly strong; it was almost like coming back into the camp after a patrol in the forest. Hol yleaf kept close to him, their pelts brushing, while Brambleclaw and Brackenfur stayed

on the outside of the group. Lionblaze knew they were ready to protect the younger cats if they needed to. And so am I. If we have to fight our way out, I’m ready.

Brambleclaw signaled for his patrol to halt in the center of the den. A broad-shouldered gray tom sat

on a shal ow ledge just below the gap in the wal , while a she-cat with a flecked brown pelt was curled up on something like a soft boulder in bright Twoleg colors. Four kits suckled at her bel y. On the other side of the den, another cat was barely visible as he peered out from underneath some wooden Twoleg

thing.

Lionblaze caught his breath as he recognized the

black-and-white tom sitting on top of another soft-looking boulder. He was the cat they had met the night before, who had run away from them.

“I’m Jingo,” the tabby she-cat announced, before Lionblaze could speak. “Over there is Hussar”—she

waved her tail at the gray tom sitting on the ledge

—“and the queen with kits is Speckle.”

“Hi, there,” Hussar meowed, with a lazy wave of his tail. Speckle just twitched her ears; she looked wary, as if she was afraid the newcomers might harm her kits.

“Over there’s Pod,” the tabby she-cat went on. The

cat underneath the wooden structure blinked at them.

“Come out, Pod, no cat is going to hurt you. And I think you’ve already met Fritz.”

As she finished speaking, she leaped up onto the

squashy boulder beside the black-and-white tom. He

stared at the Clan cats, wide-eyed, and didn’t speak.

Brambleclaw stepped forward. “Who did you think

we were?” he asked Fritz. When the tom didn’t reply, he turned to Jingo. “When we met him last night he



he turned to Jingo. “When we met him last night he

seemed to think we were connected with another cat, one who talked to you but ended up causing you

trouble. Do you know who that was?”

“We don’t trust strangers around here anymore.”

Jingo’s voice was solemn. “Not since Sol.”

Lionblaze felt a jolt in his bel y. We were right! Sol has been here!

“Sol?” Brackenfur’s neck fur rippled. “You know him, then?”

Jingo nodded. “He came here last leaf-bare, but no cat knows where from. He lived on the edge of Twolegplace for a while, then when the weather turned colder he moved into this abandoned Twoleg

nest and invited some other cats without housefolk to join him.”

“I was one of the first.” Pod emerged from

underneath the wooden thing, revealing himself to be a scrawny brown tom, his muzzle gray with age.

“Speckle and Fritz came with me.”

“And I joined later, with Hussar,” Jingo went on. “I heard about the community of cats that had made a

home for themselves, and it sounded like a good idea.”



“Did Sol act like he was your leader?” Lionblaze

asked. The patch-pelted loner had tried to take over ShadowClan; maybe that wasn’t the first time he’d been in control of a group of cats.

“Yes, did he ever tel you to believe anything in particular?” Hol yleaf added.

Jingo looked puzzled. “Not exactly. Only that we could live however we wanted to, because that’s what we deserved. Life was good, he said….”

“Life was not good!” Pod snapped. He sat down

and lifted a hind leg to scratch behind his ear. “We had to do whatever Sol told us to, like bring him food and feathers for his nest. And he scared the little cats by tel ing them that they’d die without him.”

“It wasn’t that bad!” Jingo protested. “You’re just thinking of what happened later.”

“And why wouldn’t I?” Pod stopped scratching to glare at her. “That mouse-brained idiot nearly got us al kil ed!”

Fritz nodded vigorously, giving his whiskers a nervous twitch, but stil didn’t speak.

Lionblaze glanced at Hol yleaf; she looked as

shocked as he felt, her eyes glittering and her claws working on the hard Twoleg floor. When Sol had lived in the forest, he never wanted cats to die, Lionblaze thought. Is Hollyleaf wondering if he really could have killed Ashfur?

He was distracted by Speckle’s four kits, who left

their mother and scrambled down, one after another,

from the soft boulder. Speckle sat up, watching nervously as the biggest of the four, a tom with a flecked brown pelt like his mother, bounced up to Brambleclaw.

“I’m Frisk,” he announced. “What’s your name?

Are you coming to live here?”

Brambleclaw shook his head. “We’re just passing

through. I’m Brambleclaw,” he added, addressing al

the cats. He went on to introduce the rest of the patrol. “Thanks for helping us,” he finished, dipping his head to Jingo. “The dogs would have ripped us

to pieces without you.”

“We’d help any cat in danger from those dogs,”

Jingo responded. “And you’re welcome to stay as long as you like.”

“Thank you.” Brambleclaw bowed again. “Now,

can you tel us what Sol did?”

Jingo settled herself on the soft boulder, tucking her paws underneath her chest. Hussar sprang down



lightly from the ledge and padded over to sit beside Pod. For the first time, Lionblaze noticed that he had a long scar along his side, where the fur hadn’t grown back. Glancing around, he noticed that the others had signs of injury, too: One of Fritz’s ears was torn, Pod’s muzzle was scarred, and the tip of Jingo’s tail was missing.

“These cats have been fighting hard,” he muttered

to Hol yleaf.

He sat down on the hard Twoleg floor, longing for

the grass of the forest or the soft moss of his nest in the warriors’ den. Hol yleaf sat beside him, her claws stil flexing restlessly, and their Clanmates gathered around.

“Sol didn’t cause any trouble at first,” Jingo began.

“He kept to himself and stayed out of kittypet territory.”

“He was the first cat to find this abandoned Twoleg den,” Hussar put in. “He started inviting other cats to live here with him—cats without housefolk of their own, to start with.”

“He said he wanted to keep us al safe,” Speckle

mewed, creeping a bit closer to the edge of the soft boulder.



boulder.

Pod snorted. “More likely he wanted us to do things for him. Lazy lump. He had an easy life here.”

“That’s not fair!” Speckle protested. “We’re safer

here than wandering about in the open, sleeping under bushes.”

“So

what

happened

next?”

Brambleclaw

prompted, before Pod could continue the argument.

“More and more cats joined him here.” Jingo took

up the story again. “I lived with housefolk then, but I liked the sound of what Sol was doing, so I came to

give it a try.”

“I joined soon after her,” Hussar added. “I liked the freedom. I could come and go without waiting for my

housefolk to let me in and out.”

“And catching our own prey was better than eating

that dry Twoleg food,” meowed Jingo.

“But why did the Twolegs let you stay?” Brackenfur

asked curiously. “Don’t they want this nest?”

“Obviously not,” Hussar replied with a shrug.

“Twoleg kits used to come here now and again,”

Jingo explained. “They never tried to chase us out, though, and they don’t come anymore.”

“Sol told us what to do if adult Twolegs came,”



Speckle explained. “There’s a dark space right at the top of the nest, with a pointed roof. Sol told us to hide up there.”

“They did come once or twice.” Fritz spoke for the

first time. “So we al hid.”

“And the Twolegs never found us,” Speckle added

proudly.

Even though he had good reasons for not trusting

Sol, Lionblaze realized that what he had done here

wasn’t al bad. The cats had shelter here and support from one another. He wasn’t sure why kittypets would want to come, but it was certainly better for loners than trying to survive in the open through the harsh moons of leaf-bare. It was like a Twolegplace version of a Clan.

“So what went wrong?” he meowed.

“Can’t you guess?” Jingo replied bleakly. “The dogs found us. They couldn’t get in here, because most of them are too big to get through that narrow

gap at the entrance.”

“A little one pushed his way in, once.” Hussar extended his claws, the beginnings of a snarl in his throat. “He didn’t try it twice.”

“But they lay in wait for us whenever we came out,”



Fritz continued with a shudder. “And then they chased us.”

“Clumsy, oafish brutes!” The tip of Pod’s tail twitched.

“If we did manage to hunt, they stole our prey,”

Jingo continued. “And they kil ed Flower.” Her eyes clouded with sorrow and guilt. “She was a beautiful

young cat. Her housefolk had the den next to mine,

and I persuaded her to come here.”

She bowed her head, and Fritz nudged her

shoulder.

“So how did Sol react to that?” Brackenfur asked,

after a moment’s respectful silence.

“He told us we needed to show the dogs that we

had the right to live here.” Hussar took up the story.

“So he made a plan. He found a smal unused den

beside that stretch of stone where the monsters sleep. He said if we could lure the dogs in there they wouldn’t be able to get away while we fought them.”

Fritz shuddered, letting out a frightened mewling sound, and sank his claws into the soft boulder underneath. Jingo pressed up against him

comfortingly.

“It didn’t work?” Brambleclaw guessed, though



Lionblaze already knew the answer to that question.

“What do you think?” Pod spat.

“Sol showed us how to fight,” Jingo went on. “We

spent a lot of time training—”

“Which meant there wasn’t enough time to hunt,”

Pod interrupted. “My bel y thought my throat was clawed out.”

Jingo ignored the interruption. “Then Sol said we

were ready. He chose a tom cal ed Pepper to go out

and catch some prey, and then get the dogs to chase him to the smal den. We were al lying in wait, ready to fol ow the dogs in and fight them. Sol was

with us, and when—”

“Why are you talking about that piece of fox dung?” A new voice spoke from behind Lionblaze, who glanced over his shoulder to see a black tom standing in the entrance to the den. His fluffed-out fur made him look twice his size, and his tail whipped from side to side.

Lionblaze’s muscles tensed; a cat who looked like

that was ready to attack. But then he realized that the black tom’s anger wasn’t directed toward him or his

Clanmates.

“It’s okay, Jet,” Jingo replied. “These cats asked



“It’s okay, Jet,” Jingo replied. “These cats asked about—”

“It’s not okay,” Jet hissed. “It’l never be okay. I don’t want to think about that cat ever again!” Stil bristling, he whirled around and disappeared.

“I’m sorry if we’ve upset him…” Hazeltail mewed,

gazing after the black tom.

“It’s not your fault,” Jingo assured her. “Pepper was his littermate, and now he can’t bear for any cat to mention Sol.”

“Pepper died?” Hol yleaf asked.

Hussar nodded, his eyes clouding. “Before we

ever made it into the den. We were hiding on the roof of one of the other dens, and we saw Pepper streaking across the stone space with the dogs on his tail. I’ve never heard such a racket as they were making! Then we heard this awful shriek—”

Lionblaze’s paws tingled as a yowl sounded from

outside the den, almost as if Hussar’s words had cal ed it up. It was fol owed by an outbreak of barking, drawing rapidly closer. Al the Clan cats crouched closer to the ground, frozen by fear, their claws scraping on the hard floor. Pod whisked back

underneath the Twoleg thing, while Speckle gestured



urgently with her tail. “Kits—come here quickly.” The four kits scrambled back onto the soft boulder, and

Speckle circled them protectively with her legs and tail.

Only Jingo and Hussar seemed calm. Jingo

meowed, “They can’t get in.”

Lionblaze jumped at the sound of scrabbling just outside the den. Hussar leaped to his paws, only to

relax a moment later as a ginger-and-white she-cat

poked her head through the entrance; a mouse

dangled limply from her jaws. Just behind her, a young gray tabby tom peered over her shoulder.

“Oh, it’s you, Merry.” Hussar arched his back in a

stretch, then sat down again. “And Chirp. Come and

meet these new cats.”

Merry took a step into the den, her green gaze flickering from one Clan cat to another. Then she shook her head, mumbled something inaudible

around the mouthful of prey, and retreated; Lionblaze heard the sound of her paw steps fading.

Chirp, however, padded into the den and sat

down. But he stayed near the door and kept casting

nervous glances over his shoulder.

“We’re al jumpy since the fight with the dogs,”



Hussar commented.

“And can you blame us?” Pod emerged again and

gave his chest fur a few licks, as if trying to pretend he hadn’t shot so quickly into hiding.

“Tel us what happened,” Lionblaze prompted.

“After you heard the shriek…”

“We al raced into the den,” Jingo went on, digging

her claws into the soft boulder. “Pepper was already dead. The dogs were tossing his body about. We attacked, but there were too many of them, and they

were too big and fierce for us. Every cat was injured.

The dogs ripped Frosty to pieces, and Jester was so badly wounded that he died after we brought him

back here.”

Lionblaze felt sick. Sol had made a terrible

mistake. Every cat could have died in that single battle, and it was obvious the dogs were stil causing trouble.

“Ask me if Sol joined in the fight,” Pod rasped.

Brambleclaw cocked his ears. “Wel ?”

“He didn’t raise a single claw to help us,” the old

tom growled. “He wasn’t even there to watch! He just strol ed in here while we were licking our wounds.”

“What happened then?” Brackenfur asked.



Jingo twitched her ears. “If he’d admitted he was

wrong, it might have been different. But he insisted that we were the ones who decided to fight, and it wasn’t his fault that we lost. Then he sat down and started washing himself, and asked Jet to bring him

some food.”

“If I hadn’t held Jet back, he might have ripped Sol to pieces,” Hussar added.

Birchfal ’s whiskers twitched. “I wish he had!”

Jingo looked surprised, but she didn’t ask the young warrior what he meant. “So we asked Sol to

leave,” she meowed. “We would have driven him out

if we had to, but he just told us we were making a mistake and went without a fight.” She sighed.

“Maybe he was right. I don’t know anymore.”

“No, she was right,” Birchfal muttered into

Lionblaze’s ear. “They’re better off without Sol, and so are we!”

Jingo rose to her paws, yawned and stretched, then sat down again. “That’s al we can tel you. Now tel us what you know.”

Brambleclaw and Brackenfur exchanged a

glance; it was Brackenfur who spoke first. “Sol came to the forest where we live,” he began. “It must have to the forest where we live,” he began. “It must have been after he left you. He went to stay with ShadowClan—a group of cats who live near us—

and he persuaded them to stop believing in the warrior code and the spirits of their warrior ancestors.”

The Twolegplace cats glanced blankly at one

another. Clearly they had never heard of StarClan or the warrior code.

“He can be very powerful when he’s trying to persuade you,” Jingo murmured.

Lionblaze flashed a glance at Hol yleaf. They knew

better than most cats how persuasive Sol could be.

Maybe Sol was right, Lionblaze couldn’t help

thinking, in spite of his horror at what the dogs had d o ne . Maybe these cats shouldn’t blame him

because they lost the battle. He flexed his claws, imagining what he would do if he came face to face

with one of the dogs. Maybe they should have

trained harder.

“So are you looking for Sol because of what he did to…to ShadowClan?” Jingo asked.

“No, it’s because another warrior—” Birchfal

began eagerly. Lionblaze’s bel y churned at the thought of discussing Ashfur’s murder.

Brambleclaw raised his tail to silence the younger

warrior. “We just need to talk to Sol about something that happened recently,” he stated calmly. “Have you seen him?”

“No, and we don’t want to,” Pod growled.

Hussar muttered an agreement, but Lionblaze

noticed that Speckle was looking wistful, as if she had better memories of Sol.

“I haven’t seen Sol.” Chirp, who had remained quietly by the door, spoke suddenly, startling Lionblaze. “But I heard he’s back.”

Hussar scraped his claws hard against the floor.

“He wouldn’t dare!”

“Not here,” Chirp explained, “but on the other side

of Twolegplace. Where a cat cal ed Purdy used to live.”

“We

know

Purdy!”

Lionblaze

exclaimed,

remembering the old loner who had guided them on

part of their journey to the mountains.

“Thanks, that’s a great help,” Brambleclaw

meowed. “We’l go and look for him there.”

“It’s too late to go now.” Jingo rose to her paws and leaped lightly off the soft boulder to land beside Hussar. “You can stay here for the night.”

Brambleclaw dipped his head. “Thank you.”

“You can eat with us,” Jingo continued. “Come on,

Hussar, help me carry the prey.”

The two cats left and returned a moment later loaded with fresh-kil , which they shared among al the cats. Speckle jumped down from her boulder to

join them, and her kits scrambled after her; she picked out a mouse for them and they squabbled happily over it.

“This isn’t what Sol would have taught them,”

Lionblaze murmured to Hol yleaf as he crouched to eat a blackbird. “Remember how he told

ShadowClan that every cat should feed themselves?

He said it was a sign of weakness for any cat to depend on another.”

Hol yleaf nodded. “These cats obviously have a fresh-kil pile somewhere, and they hunt for cats who can’t hunt for themselves. They’re almost like a Clan.”

“It looks like they’re better off without Sol.” But as Lionblaze spoke, he knew that some of these cats wouldn’t agree with him. He had felt the pul of Sol’s charm, his quiet authority and sense that he knew exactly the right thing to do. Jingo and the others must have felt it too, and missed the loner when he

was gone. Lionblaze thoughtful y ate his blackbird. It was plump and juicy, but it had a taint of the Thunderpath about it, and he would have found it hard to choke down if he hadn’t been so ravenous.

When they had finished eating, Speckle’s kits

started to bat a scrap of leaf around, squealing and tumbling over one another in their excitement. Frisk, the biggest and boldest of the four, batted the leaf toward Lionblaze.

Some of Lionblaze’s tension melted away as he batted the leaf back to the kit. This was almost like playing with the kits back in the stone hol ow.

Speckle’s litter were big and strong, almost ready to become apprentices.

Soon they should be learning to fight and hunt,

he thought. Do these cats have the skills to teach them properly?

Hol yleaf joined in the game, too, chasing the leaf

and pouncing on it until al four kits col apsed, panting, beside their mother.

“They’re fine kits,” Lionblaze gasped, flopping down on the floor in front of Speckle. “They’l grow up down on the floor in front of Speckle. “They’l grow up to be strong cats.”

“I hope so,” Speckle murmured. She bent over

Frisk, licking his rumpled fur. Then she looked up again. “Whatever you think Sol has done, you’re wrong.”

Lionblaze’s bel y lurched as he glanced at his sister; Hol yleaf’s green eyes were wide with alarm.

How much does this cat know?

He was too startled to reply. After a couple of heartbeats, Speckle went on quietly: “Sol never gets his own paws dirty. If something has happened, another cat did it—maybe at Sol’s bidding, maybe not. You won’t be able to accuse him of anything.”

There was a yearning in her voice; even though she knew the damage Sol had done here, she

clearly wanted him back.

“Is Sol the father of your kits?” Hol yleaf asked, reaching out her tail to touch the brown queen’s flank.

Speckle shook her head. “Their father left when the dogs started to become a problem.” She

hesitated, then added almost defiantly, “I wanted them to be Sol’s. I know that the other cats say he betrayed us, but we were the ones who decided to

fight the dogs. Sol didn’t force us to do anything.”

No, he just made it seem as if you couldn’t do anything else. Lionblaze couldn’t speak the words aloud to Speckle. It was obvious she was stil deeply in love with the loner.

He and Hol yleaf exchanged another glance.

Neither of them had mentioned Ashfur, but Lionblaze

knew that the gray warrior’s death must be weighing

on his littermate’s thoughts, just as it was on his own.

Speckle bent her head and went on grooming

Frisk. “If Sol came back,” she mewed between licks,

“I’d be very glad to see him.”





CHAPTER 12





Jayfeather shifted uncomfortably on the bare earth.

How was any cat supposed to sleep without a

proper nest? But Leafpool had kept him so busy the

day before that there had been no time to search for fresh moss. “It’l do the den good to be aired out,”

Leafpool had said. Huh! Jayfeather wriggled again, feeling a cold dawn wind ruffle his pelt.



The sound of a cat brushing past the bramble screen brought him properly awake. He picked up Leafpool’s scent, and the smel of the moss she carried in her jaw. At last! But why didn’t she ask me to help? Jayfeather’s paws itched with irritation that Leafpool seemed determined to do even the most basic tasks without him. Does she think I’m too incompetent even to carry moss?

But there was no point in protesting. Jayfeather stumbled out of the scoop where his nest should have been and helped Leafpool arrange the moss near the trickle of water, where sick cats slept.

“Do you want me to fetch more?” he offered.

His mentor’s only reply was a grunt that could have meant anything. Jayfeather wanted to ask her what was biting her, but he knew she wouldn’t tel him anything. She’d probably claw my ears off just

for asking, he muttered to himself. The only way I’ll get any answers—about my own past and what’s

going on with Leafpool—is if I look for them myself.

While he pushed the moss tidily into place,

Jayfeather cast his mind back to his earliest memories. His littermates’ absence stabbed him

like a claw. We might find out a lot more if we could share what we remember!

He recal ed a long, cold journey, stumbling through

snow that reached up to his bel y fur, fol owing his mother’s scent.

No—Squirrelflight’s scent! Pausing with a pawful

of moss, he tried to think himself back into that snowbound forest. He strove to distinguish each individual scent: his own, Lionblaze’s, Hol yleaf’s, Squirrelflight’s…and there was another! Another

adult cat, a warm and bulky shape. He’d never remembered this detail before, but another cat was

definitely there, just ahead of Squirrelflight, forcing a way through the snow….

Who was that? Jayfeather wondered. Did two

cats bring us back to the hollow?

He needed to ask another cat, one who had been

in ThunderClan when Squirrelflight brought her kits to the hol ow. But it had to be a cat who wouldn’t get suspicious about his questions or tel the rest of the Clan what he had been asking.

Well, there’s one cat who doesn’t gossip….

“I’l go get more moss,” he meowed, rapidly

shoving the last pawful into place.

Without giving Leafpool a chance to protest, he brushed past the bramble screen and into the

clearing. But instead of heading for the thorn tunnel, he darted across to the elders’ den under the hazel

bush.

“Mousefur!” he cal ed, ducking under a trailing strand of honeysuckle.

The skinny brown elder was curled up near the trunk of the hazel. “I hope your tail’s on fire or foxes are invading the camp,” she rasped, stifling a yawn.

“Or that you’ve got another real y good excuse for waking me up.”

“Sorry,” Jayfeather mumbled. Mouse dung! That’s

a great way to start….

“Don’t worry,” Longtail mewed peaceably. The

blind elder was sitting by Mousefur’s side;

Jayfeather heard the rasp of his tongue as he gave

himself a thorough wash. “Mousefur has been asleep

for ages. It’s time she woke up.”

Mousefur let out an annoyed hiss. “Wel , what do

you want?”

“I’ve come to check you for fleas,” Jayfeather explained, thinking fast. “One of the apprentices brought some back from patrol.” He hoped neither of

the elders would think to mention his lie to any other the elders would think to mention his lie to any other cat.

“I haven’t been scratching,” Mousefur meowed.

“But you can check my pelt anyway.” She settled herself comfortably with her paws tucked underneath

her. “Be careful you don’t miss any,” she added as Jayfeather began probing her thick, ungroomed fur.

“You’ve been Leafpool’s apprentice for long

enough.”

Jayfeather bit back an irritated retort as he realized this could be the opening to the

conversation he wanted. “That’s true,” he mewed. “It was the middle of last leaf-bare when I was born, wasn’t it?”

“The coldest leaf-bare I remember,” Longtail

agreed. “I remember how thick the snow was. The whole Clan was stunned when Squirrelflight came back to the hol ow with three kits! She said they’d been born earlier than she expected, which is why she didn’t have a chance to get back to the nursery, but even stil , what queen plans to have kits in the dead of leaf-bare?”

“Thank StarClan she had Leafpool with her,”

Mousefur added, twitching her ears as Jayfeather parted the fur on her head. “She’d have been in big

trouble otherwise.”

Leafpool! Jayfeather stopped running his claws

through Mousefur’s pelt. So Leafpool was the

second cat he hadn’t been able to identify. She’d never said anything to him about being with

Squirrelflight when he was born….

Locating a bit of twig on the ground, he snatched

it up behind Mousefur’s back and cracked it in his teeth. “That’s one flea you don’t need to worry about,” he meowed. Trying to sound as if the answer

didn’t matter very much, he added, “Do you

remember anything else about Squirrelflight bringing us home?”

“Not a lot,” the elder replied. “It was so cold and snowy, we spent most of our time asleep that leaf-bare. I do remember how surprised every cat was that Squirrelflight hadn’t realized how close she was to having her kits when she went away. But then, she was always scatterbrained, right from when she was

a kit.”

“Did you notice anything…odd about that time?”

Jayfeather asked, cracking the twig again. He hoped

Mousefur wouldn’t think she was infested with fleas.



“Odd?” Mousefur snorted. “Most of what the Clan

does these days seems odd to me.”

“I remember,” Longtail put in. “It was around then

that Leafpool fed you that funny-tasting herb.”

Jayfeather’s ears pricked. “What funny herb?”

“Oh, how should I know?” Mousefur muttered.

“Leafpool brought me some tansy, as usual. I think she expects me to live on the stuff every leaf-bare.

And this weird-tasting stuff was mixed in with it.”

A tingle in Jayfeather’s paws told him that the strange herb was important. “Did Leafpool tel you what it was?”

Mousefur stretched, shaking her pelt. “No. I never

asked her. When I complained about the taste, she

just took away what was left. She said it hadn’t been meant for me anyway.”

“What was it like?” Jayfeather pressed, moving across to Longtail to check his pelt.

“Odd, but not unpleasant,” Mousefur mewed. “I’d have clawed Leafpool’s ears off if she fed me something disgusting! It tasted cold, like frost on fur, and fresh like grass, even though it was dry and dusty—from right at the back of Leafpool’s store, I’d guess.”



“How weird.” Jayfeather gave the twig another

crack. “It’s not like Leafpool to get herbs muddled up.”

Mousefur snorted. “She was al over the place, trying to help Squirrelflight care for you kits! The fuss she made, any cat would think Squirrelflight was the first queen ever to give birth!”

“Real y…” Jayfeather murmured.

Quickly finishing his examination of Longtail’s fur

—and finding a real flea, which he crunched between

his teeth—he said good-bye to the elders and

headed into the forest to gather moss. As he tugged

mouthfuls of it from between the roots of a tree, he wondered what Mousefur’s mystery herb could have

been. It was strange that Leafpool hadn’t told Mousefur what the herb was or who it had been meant for. And stranger stil that Leafpool, who was always so careful, had made a mistake.

I need to find out what the herb was, Jayfeather

thought, gathering up his moss to carry it back to the camp.

When he returned to the medicine cats’ den, he found that Leafpool had already gathered more

bedding while he was talking to the elders. “Did you bedding while he was talking to the elders. “Did you go to RiverClan to find that moss?” she demanded.

“Or have you been mooning about in the forest again?”

“Uh…no.” Jayfeather dropped his bundle and

started to arrange it in his own nest. “I thought I’d check on the elders first.” When Leafpool didn’t respond, he added, “Mousefur told me a weird story.

She said you gave her a funny-tasting herb once, mixed up with her tansy.”

A pulse of alarm came from Leafpool, but she mewed, “I don’t remember that. When was this?”

“Oh, a long time ago.” Something told Jayfeather

not to be too specific. He didn’t want his mentor to know that he had been asking questions about his birth. “Do you know what it was?”

Leafpool let out an annoyed hiss. “How am I

supposed to know that? For StarClan’s sake, do you

think I don’t have more important things to worry about?”

“I was just—”

“If you’re so bored that you have to start asking about something that happened last leaf-bare, I can

soon find you something to do. We’re stil short of moss in here, so you can get on with that.”

“Okay.” Jayfeather was glad to leave. But I never

mentioned last leaf-bare, he thought as he padded

across the clearing. He had sensed his mentor’s fear, too. Leafpool was lying. She knows what the herb was, and she knows it’s important. I must be getting close to the truth—and Leafpool doesn’t want me to find it.





CHAPTER 13





Hollyleaf blinked in surprise when she woke among

the stone wal s of the Twoleg nest instead of under



the branches of the warriors’ den in the ThunderClan camp. Then she remembered their journey to find Sol, and how Jingo had brought them to this

abandoned Twoleg nest to save them from the dogs.

As Hol yleaf sat up, her brother yawned and

stretched. “I don’t like this place,” he muttered. “It’s time we left.”

Hol yleaf murmured agreement. It wasn’t right for warriors to be so close to al this Twoleg stuff, even though there were no Twolegs here.

The pale light of dawn flooded into the den

through the gap in the wal . Looking around, Hol yleaf saw that Birchfal and Hazeltail were stil asleep.

Brackenfur was perched on the ledge under the gap

where Hussar had sat the night before. There was no

sign of Brambleclaw, but a moment later he sprang

up from outside and squeezed through the gap to sit

beside Brackenfur.

“Al ’s quiet,” he reported. “But there’s a strong smel of dog.”

Hol yleaf twitched her whiskers; she could pick up

the rank scent even here.

“We have to get moving,” Brackenfur meowed.

“Have you seen Jingo?”



Brambleclaw shook his head. Speckle and her

kits were curled up in a furry heap on one of the soft boulders, while Fritz and Pod were sleeping on the

other. There was no sign of the other Twolegplace cats.

“She’l be here somewhere.” Brambleclaw jumped

down inside the nest. “I think we can trust her.”

He padded over to prod Birchfal and Hazeltail awake. As the two younger warriors were blinking sleep away, Jingo padded in through the entrance to

the den.

“Good, you’re ready,” she mewed, with a brisk nod of greeting. “Let’s go.”

She led the way into the Twoleg territory through the gap in the wal . “This journey’s going to be a bit different,” she warned the Clan cats when they were

al in the raw, damp air of the leaf-bare morning. “We won’t be setting paw to the ground until we get where we’re going.”

Hol yleaf shot a startled glance at her Clanmates,

and saw that they were al looking equal y surprised.

How could they get anywhere if their paws didn’t touch the ground? Was Jingo expecting them to fly?

“It’s not safe to walk around on the ground since the battle with the dogs,” Jingo explained. “The dogs lie in wait for us and hunt us like prey.”

Shuddering, Hol yleaf leaned closer to Lionblaze.

“That’s exactly what happened to us yesterday.”

Her brother nodded; his amber eyes were

gleaming and his claws flexed as if he was

imagining his chance to slash a dog that attacked him or his Clanmates. Better to stay out of their way, Hol yleaf thought.

“So we’ve found a different way of moving around

our territory,” Jingo went on. Graceful y she leaped up onto the top of the Twoleg fence. “Ready?” she cal ed, glancing over her shoulder at the Clan cats.

Brambleclaw quickly leaped up beside her,

fol owed by the rest of the patrol. Jingo set off, balancing easily on the narrow fence, then turning a corner to pad past several Twoleg dens, with a smal

Thunderpath on the other side.

Hol yleaf stiffened as the door to one of the Twoleg nests opened and a little white dog bolted out; its high-pitched yapping fil ed the air.

“It’s okay,” Jingo reassured the Clan cats. “That’s

a housedog. It’s a stupid nuisance, just like al the others, but it’s not dangerous like the wild dogs.”



others, but it’s not dangerous like the wild dogs.”

Hol yleaf had to take her word for it, but as she watched the dog bounding along the bottom of the fence and scrabbling about in the earth under a bush, she was glad that she wasn’t down below where it could get at her. She dug her claws more firmly into the narrow strip of wood under her paws and focused on the tip of Lionblaze’s tail.

The fence came to an end at a row of smal dens

with flat roofs. “These are monster nests,” Jingo told them, leaping up onto the nearest roof.

“Monsters have nests?” Hazeltail exclaimed.

“Sure.” Jingo waved her tail to where a Twoleg was approaching at the edge of the Thunderpath.

“Watch.”

The Clan cats jumped up onto the roof beside her

and watched the Twoleg as it opened the door of one of the dens and vanished inside. A moment later

they heard the throaty growl of a monster. It nosed its way out of the den and headed down the

Thunderpath, with the Twoleg in its bel y.

“Great StarClan, this is where they sleep!”

Birchfal ’s neck fur was bristling.

“Yes, but they can’t climb up here,” Jingo



meowed. “Let’s get on.”

The patrol easily bounded across the flat roofs until the cats came to another fence and more Twoleg dens. Daylight was strengthening and a stiff

wind had sprung up; Hol yleaf gripped with her claws at every step, scared that she would be blown off her skinny perch. So this was what Jingo meant by not setting paw on the ground. Not flying, but staying high up, out of reach of the wild dogs. She tried to imagine not daring to set paw on the ground in the

forest, and having to leap from tree to tree to avoid being chased and kil ed.

No cat should be forced to live like this.

At the next corner, the fence gave way to a wal built of red stone; the top was wider and it was easier to pad along. The Thunderpath here was wider too, with stone trees growing at both edges, and a few monsters prowling along it. Every so often the wal was interrupted by a lower section of wooden fence; Jingo slid down onto it, padded quickly across, and leaped up onto the wal on the other side. The Clan cats fol owed. Hol yleaf’s pelt prickled with fear as she remembered how the dog

pack had leaped the low fence the day before; but no dogs appeared, and every cat reached the other

side of the wooden fence safely.

Farther along the wal , Jingo halted; peering past

her, Hol yleaf saw that one of the wooden sections had been swung back, leaving a gap between their

stretch of wal and the next. As if at a signal, a flurry of barking broke out somewhere behind them, and a

gust of wind brought the scent of dogs.

“We’l have to jump,” Jingo decided. “Get back a

bit; leave me space for a running start.”

Once the Clan cats had shuffled backward, Jingo

bounded along the wal and took off from the end in a powerful leap, landing neatly on the other side. The Clan cats glanced at one another; Hol yleaf could see that Hazeltail and Birchfal were both looking nervous.

“I’l go next,” she meowed, deciding it would be better to get this over with than to watch her Clanmates go ahead of her. She hurtled along the wal and into the air before she could think about the wide gap and the nearby dogs.

Her paws hit the red stone of the wal and Jingo jumped forward to steady her.

“Wel done,” the brown tabby mewed. “Move along



to give the others space.”

Hol yleaf squeezed past her, turning in time to see

Brackenfur leaping easily across the gap. Birchfal fol owed him; the young warrior’s front paws landed

on the wal , but his hind paws dangled down. His eyes were huge with fear as the barking grew louder

and two dogs raced round the corner. Quick as lightning, Brackenfur grabbed Birchfal ’s scruff in his teeth and hauled him the rest of the way; his tail whisked up just in time, out of reach of the leading dog’s teeth.

Birchfal shuddered. “Thanks, Brackenfur. I thought

I was dog food for sure.”

Hazeltail was shivering on the other side of the gap, gazing down in terror at the barking dogs as they reared up on their hind legs and scrabbled at the wal . “I can’t, Brambleclaw,” she whispered. “I just can’t. I know I’l fal .”

“No, you won’t,” the Clan deputy assured her.

“You’re good at jumping. You’l be fine.”

“If you fal , I’l leap down and fight the dogs,”

Lionblaze promised.

With a despairing look at both of them, Hazeltail moved back a couple of fox-lengths and bounded up



moved back a couple of fox-lengths and bounded up

to the end of the wal . Both dogs hurled themselves

at her as she leaped, but she cleared the gap with a tail-length to spare, and was welcomed on the other

side by a quick lick on her ear from Birchfal .

Lionblaze fol owed and then Brambleclaw, and the

cats set off again, with the dogs pacing alongside a fox-length below, whining and yelping in frustration at not being able to reach their prey. Hol yleaf wondered if there was any way of shaking them off.

The Twolegplace wouldn’t last forever. Sooner or later they would have to come down to the ground, and then they would be ripped to pieces.

“Where do you think you’re going?”

A new voice came from up ahead: Hol yleaf

spotted a huge blue-furred tom standing nose to nose with Jingo. He had the sleek, wel -fed look of a kittypet, but his neck fur was beginning to fluff up and his blue eyes were unfriendly.

“Just passing through,” Jingo replied calmly.

“Wel , get a move on,” the kittypet growled. “I’m going home for some sleep. I don’t want to listen to that racket al day. Those dogs wouldn’t even be here if you hadn’t brought them.”



Anger lit up Lionblaze’s eyes, and he began to push forward along the edge of the wal to stand beside Jingo. Hol yleaf’s fur prickled. Starting a fight here would probably end with both cats fal ing off the wal into the waiting jaws of the dogs.

Brambleclaw raised his tail to halt Lionblaze.

“Stay out of it, unless the kittypet attacks,” he ordered. “Let Jingo handle it.”

Lionblaze obeyed, but he kept his furious gaze fixed on the kittypet.

“You’re the one who’s holding us up,” Jingo

replied, stil calm. “If you weren’t stuck there in the way, we’d be long gone.”

The blue-furred tom let out an angry snort, but said nothing more. Instead he leaped down into the Twoleg territory, raced across to the nest, and vanished through a smal hole in the door.

Hol yleaf relaxed; they had more important things

to do than teach kittypets some manners. Stil with the dogs fol owing, they padded farther along the wal until they came to another corner.

“This is where we can get rid of the dogs,” Jingo

told them. Turning the corner, she led the way along a narrow wooden fence between two Twoleg dens.



There was no way for the dogs to fol ow, even though they tried to push themselves into the gap at the foot of the fence. Their frustrated yelping sounded behind Hol yleaf as she and her Clanmates approached the

nest.

“This way—and watch where you’re putting your

paws.” Jingo sprang up onto a narrow, flat area above the entrance to the Twoleg nest, then clawed

her way up a creeper that grew alongside it until she reached the edge of the Twoleg roof. “It’s not hard!”

she cal ed down, beckoning with her tail.

“And hedgehogs can fly!” Birchfal muttered.

But when it was Hol yleaf’s turn to climb, she realized that Jingo was right. The creeper had thick, twisted stems that created plenty of paw holds, and it was strong enough to bear even the weight of Brambleclaw and Lionblaze. But the edge of the roof

felt unsteady, and Hol yleaf tried unsuccessful y to dig her claws in, terrified that the wind would blow her off.

“Where now?” Brambleclaw panted as he hauled

himself over the edge to stand beside Jingo.

As an answer, the brown tabby she-cat began

scrambling up the steep slope of the roof. “This is a good shortcut,” she meowed.

“We can’t go up there!” Hazeltail gasped. “We’l fal !”

“If Jingo can do it, we can do it,” Brackenfur declared firmly. “Up you go, Hazeltail. I’l be right behind you.”

Slipping and scrabbling, the Clan cats clawed

their way up the slope to where Jingo was sitting with her tail curled round her paws, at the very top of the roof next to a couple of tree stumps made of stone.

“It’s great up here,” she mewed as Hol yleaf

struggled up the last fox-length to join her.

“Sometimes I come just to look.”

You come up here even if you don’t have to?

Hol yleaf felt as if her claws had been worn away in the desperate climb. A sharp ridge stretched away in both directions; it felt far too narrow to balance on.

Wind buffeted her fur and plastered her whiskers to

the side of her face.

Not wanting to let Jingo know how uneasy she was, she forced herself to look up from her clinging claws. Instantly she forgot to be scared. She could see forever! Al the way across the tumbled roofs of the Twolegplace, to the flat stretch of rough grass the Twolegplace, to the flat stretch of rough grass that covered the cliffs above the sun-drown-place.

And beyond that, over the gray, heaving waves as far as the horizon.

“Look!” Lionblaze yowled, dragging himself up to

balance on the ridge beside Hol yleaf. “You can see

the mountains!”

Hol yleaf twisted around to stare in the opposite direction. After the edge of the forest, the mountains lay like a smudge of cloud on the horizon. She could make out gray slopes and cliffs, and peaks tipped with snow reaching up to the sky.

“Do you think we’re as high as we were in the mountains?” she asked wonderingly.

“Of course not.” There was a hint of scorn in Lionblaze’s voice. “It took us ages to climb up to the waterfal .”

Hol yleaf realized he was right, and yet the

mountains seemed so close she could almost

imagine leaping off the roof and landing on the ledge that led behind the waterfal to the cave where the Tribe of Rushing Water lived.

“I wonder what they’re doing,” she murmured, half

to herself. “Wil we ever see Stormfur and Brook again?”

No cat answered her. As soon as the rest of the

patrol had reached the roof ridge, Jingo rose to her paws. “For this next bit, you have to be extra careful,”

she warned. “Going down is far harder than going up. If you slip…wel , just don’t slip, that’s al .”

Cautiously, in a half-crouch, Jingo led the way down the other side of the roof. Hol yleaf’s paws skidded on the smooth stone of the roof; there was

nothing to hold on to, and the downward slope seemed to end in empty air. When she was halfway

down, a big white bird swooped past her, letting out a raucous cry and fil ing the air with the beating of its wings. Hol yleaf froze, trying to dig her claws into the stone, until it was gone.

“ I’ m never doing this again!” Birchfal hissed behind her.

Hol yleaf was shaking by the time they reached the edge of the roof and perched on a narrow channel half choked with leaves and other debris. A

couple of fox-lengths below was a flat roof, and just beyond that, a narrow Thunderpath.

“Is that another monster nest?” Hazeltail asked.

Jingo nodded. “We’l have to come down to the ground here,” she meowed, “because we have to cross that Thunderpath. But I think we’re safe now.

The wild dogs don’t often come this far.”

When she reached the grass beside the

Thunderpath, Hol yleaf tasted the air. She could pick out the mingled scents of several dogs, but none of

them were close by. And no monsters appeared as

Jingo paused to listen, then waved her tail for the Clan cats to cross.

Once on the other side, Jingo jumped up onto another wal , this one built of gray stone. Padding along it, Hol yleaf saw that the Twoleg nests here were smal er, with narrower strips of grassy territory behind them. A couple of tiny Twoleg kits were playing on one of the patches of grass, but they didn’t notice the cats as they padded past.

“Is it much farther to Purdy’s nest?” Brackenfur asked. “I think every cat is getting tired and hungry.”

Hol yleaf muttered agreement. Every muscle in her

body was aching, and her bel y felt like a giant hole.

The sky was covered with cloud, but she sensed it was long past sun-high, and no cat had eaten since

the fresh-kil in the abandoned Twoleg nest the night before.



“Not far now,” Jingo responded. “We can—”

She broke off as a gust of wind swept across them, bringing with it a slap of icy rain. Birchfal let out a yowl of alarm. Hol yleaf flattened herself to the top of the wal , terrified that the wind would blow her off.

“This way!” Jingo ordered.

She ran along the top of the wal to the fence dividing the Twoleg territories. A bushy pine tree grew close to the wal ; Jingo sprang up onto the nearest branch and forced her way in among the needles. Peering out, she cal ed, “Come on! We need to shelter.”

Unbalanced by the buffeting wind, the Clan cats stumbled along the wal and climbed into the tree.

Hol yleaf’s pelt was soaked by the time she reached

it. The pine needles raked through her fur as she plunged into the branches, clawing for paw holds so

she could climb higher.

“What does she think we are, squirrels?”

Lionblaze gasped as he struggled upward. The

branches dipped and swung under his greater

weight, and Hol yleaf suddenly felt the whole tree spinning around. She drove her claws hard into the



spinning around. She drove her claws hard into the

branch and closed her eyes until the dizzy sensation faded.

“I thought you came from a forest,” Jingo meowed,

a tail-length above where Hol yleaf was clinging.

“Aren’t you used to trees?”

“We don’t climb that often,” Brambleclaw replied.

He had stayed lower down in the tree, just above the spot where it overhung the wal . “If we’re caught in the rain in the forest, we’d rather shelter among the roots of a tree, or under a bush.”

“Wel , you learn something new every day,” Jingo

responded, sounding amused.

By the time the rainstorm was over, Hol yleaf could

tel that the daylight was beginning to fade. I hope we reach Purdy’s den before nightfall. I don’t want to be wandering around this Twolegplace in the dark.

Scrambling out of the tree after her Clanmates, she

tried to groom the pine needles from her fur, but the whole of her pelt was clumped and messy. I might as well be a rogue, she thought crossly, not a Clan

cat at all.

Then a deeper pang shook her. Maybe that’s what

I am.



The patrol fol owed Jingo along more wal s and fences, and over the roofs of another set of monster nests, until twilight began to spil from the shadows.

Eventual y Jingo halted at the corner of a wal .

“See that hol y bush?” she meowed, waving her tail in the direction of a dark, bushy mass poking over a fence on the other side of a smal

Thunderpath. “Purdy’s den is just beyond it.”

“Thank you, Jingo,” Brambleclaw meowed. “We

would never have found it without you.”

“You’re welcome,” the she-cat replied. “You’l be able to hunt and spend the night there. But be careful,” she added more seriously. “Sol has a way

of making cats believe in him. I know, because I believed in him, too. Enough to leave my housefolk,

where I was happy.” In the gathering dusk, her eyes

shone with sadness.

“Why don’t you go back to your housefolk?”

Birchfal asked.

“Because the other cats need me,” Jingo replied.

“Every cat needs a leader—someone to fol ow,

someone to make the hard decisions. That’s why we

listened to Sol. But it’s my job now. I can’t leave them.”



Loneliness throbbed in her voice. Hol yleaf felt desperately sorry for her. A Clan leader was chosen

through the warrior code and given nine lives by StarClan. It was a huge honor, and the leader had the support of the Clan deputy, the medicine cat, and the senior warriors. But Jingo had no one.

The tabby she-cat gave herself a shake, as if getting rid of useless regrets. She touched noses with each of the Clan cats. “Good-bye and good luck,” she meowed. “Come and see us if you ever pass our nest again.”

“We wil ,” Brackenfur promised. “Good-bye and

good luck to you, too.”

Jingo dipped her head as the other cats added their good-byes, and turned to pad along the wal , back the way she had come. Her head and her tail

were lifted high.

“Good-bye, Jingostar,” Brambleclaw whispered,

too softly for the retreating she-cat to hear him. “May StarClan light your path.”





Hol yleaf crouched just behind Brambleclaw in the

shadows underneath the hol y bush. The Twoleg den

beyond looked even more abandoned than the one

where Jingo and the others lived. Dark holes gaped

in the wal s and roof.

“Remember when we met Purdy on the way to the

mountains?” Lionblaze murmured into his sister’s ear. “He said his Upwalker had died.”

“Maybe Purdy won’t be here at al ,” Hol yleaf suggested. She wasn’t sure whether she would be glad or sorry. She looked forward to meeting the cranky old cat again, but she was afraid of what the encounter with Sol would bring.

“There’s only one way to find out,” Brambleclaw meowed. He began to pick his way through the straggling bushes that surrounded the nest.

Hol yleaf’s jaws flooded as she picked up a strong smel of mouse.

“Prey!” Hazeltail’s voice was sharp with hunger.

“Brambleclaw, may we hunt?”

The Clan deputy hesitated for a heartbeat. “Okay,”

he mewed. “But let’s make it quick. And don’t leave

this bit of territory.”

The patrol scattered among the bushes. Hol yleaf

soon pinpointed a mouse scurrying through dead leaves, and kil ed it with a swift blow. “Thanks, StarClan,” she mumbled through the first delicious mouthful. It felt as if she hadn’t eaten for a moon. She had just finished gulping down her fresh-kil when she heard Brambleclaw cal ing the patrol together. As she slipped through the bushes, another mouse

practical y ran across her paws. She held it down and bit its throat, then carried the limp body back to her Clanmates.

The others were waiting for her. Lionblaze was swal owing the last of his prey while Birchfal swiped his tongue around his jaws with a satisfied

expression.

“Everyone fed?” Brambleclaw asked. “Hol yleaf,

are you going to eat that?”

Hol yleaf shook her head. “I already ate,” she explained around the mouse. “I thought we could give this to Purdy.”

Brambleclaw nodded approvingly. “Good idea.

Let’s go, then.”

Cautiously, stopping every few paw steps to listen

and to taste the air, he led the way up to the Twoleg nest and through the dark, gaping entrance hole.

Hol yleaf shivered as she stepped inside. It was even colder here than outside: a raw cold that struck upward from the damp stone floor. Brambles grew through the gaps in the wal s, as if the territory outside was invading the nest. There was a musty smel made up of stale prey, rotting leaves, and mold. But there was a smel of cats, too, stronger and fresher than the other scents.

“Purdy?” Brambleclaw cal ed.



There was no reply. The deputy padded forward,

with the patrol clustered tightly together behind him.

Every hair on Hol yleaf’s pelt prickled. There was something strange about this place, something chil y and unwelcoming.

Then a new voice spoke behind them. “Are you looking for me?”





CHAPTER 14





Hollyleaf whirled around. Behind her, in an arched

opening, a tal , wel -muscled cat was outlined against the dusk. The white patches on his pelt shone very brightly.

“Sol!” Hazeltail’s gasp was amazed and terrified al at once.

She really thinks Sol is the killer! Hol yleaf thought.

She was aware of bristling pelts and stiff limbs around her. But as soon as she looked into Sol’s glowing amber eyes, Hol yleaf felt herself relaxing.

How could she have forgotten how wise he was, how

calm and certain he was about the future? Nothing troubled him, because he already knew what to expect.

“Greetings, Sol.” Brambleclaw stepped forward.

“Yes, we’re looking for you. You need to come back

to ThunderClan.”

Sol looked into the eyes of each cat in turn.

“Something has happened.”



Hol yleaf felt a jolt in her bel y, as if a stone had struck her. What does he know about Ashfur?

“We just need you to come with us,” Brambleclaw

meowed. “Firestar wants to talk to you.”

Sol’s eyes narrowed. “Something has happened

that you think concerns me. Something bad. You wouldn’t come al this way to thank me.” He paused

thoughtful y. “A cat has died….”

Behind Hol yleaf, Birchfal caught his breath.

“No,” Sol corrected himself. “A cat has been

kil ed. And you think I’m responsible.” The tip of his tail twitched, but he betrayed no other emotion.

I’d be terrified if any cat accused me, Hol yleaf thought, scraping her claws against the cold stone.

But Sol just surveyed the patrol calmly and waited for them to speak.

“He must be guilty!” Hazeltail whispered to

Hol yleaf. “He didn’t even ask who died!”

“Sol? Is that you?” A frail voice broke the silence, and Purdy appeared in the entrance, dragging a scrawny rabbit behind him. He was thinner than when Hol yleaf had last seen him, and his tabby pelt looked messier than ever.

“Look what I got!” Purdy dropped the prey and looked up. He blinked in astonishment as he

recognized the Clan cats. “If it ain’t Brambleclaw!” he exclaimed. “And Hol ypaw and Lionpaw! I hope you

two young ’uns are behaving yourselves.”

“Yes, we are,” Lionblaze replied, padding forward

to touch noses with the old loner. “And we’re warriors now. Lionblaze and Hol yleaf.”

“Wel , who’d have thought it?” Purdy’s eyes

gleamed. “Wel done, youngsters.”

For a few heartbeats, Hol yleaf felt like an

apprentice again. She should have been insulted, that Purdy stil thought of her and her brother as young cats who were always getting into mischief.

Instead she yearned for the days when everything had seemed so simple, and al she had to do was make herself the best warrior she could.

“How’s that brother o’ yours?” Purdy asked.

“He’s Jayfeather now,” Hol yleaf replied. “He’s a ful medicine cat.”

Purdy shook his head again. “Who’d have thought

it?” he repeated.

Brambleclaw padded forward and dipped his

head to the old loner. “Greetings, Purdy. It’s good to see you again. Come and meet my other



Clanmates. This is Birchfal , and this is Hazeltail and Brackenfur.”

“Good to know you,” Purdy mumbled, looking a bit

embarrassed to be among so many strangers.

“I’m sorry, Purdy.” Sol stepped forward, to stand in front of the old cat. “I have to go.”

Purdy blinked in astonishment. “What? Why?”

When Sol didn’t reply, he added, “I know you’ve only been here a couple o’ days, but I reckoned we were

getting on fine. This old nest don’t feel half as empty wi’ you around. And look—” He waved his tail toward

the rabbit he had dragged in. “I found us some prey.

It’s a bit old and scrawny, but it could make a good meal….” His voice trailed off, and he hunched his shoulders.

“You enjoy the rabbit, Purdy,” Sol mewed gently, his amber eyes glowing. “I think the ThunderClan cats want to leave at once.”

“What’s al the rush?” Purdy turned to

Brambleclaw. “Why do you need Sol to leave with you right now? Couldn’t you al stay here a bit longer? You’d be right welcome.”

Let Sol stay here. Hol yleaf wanted to speak the

words aloud. We don’t need to take him back.



words aloud. We don’t need to take him back.

Purdy needs him more than we do. But she knew that was impossible.

“We’l stay for the night,” Brambleclaw decided.

“But we’l have to leave at dawn.”

“Fine!” Purdy’s ears perked up. “Have some o’

this rabbit,” he invited proudly.

“Thank you,” Brambleclaw replied, his voice

gentle, “but we can catch our own to add to your fresh-kil pile.”

“I brought you a mouse,” Hol yleaf added,

snatching up her prey and dropping it at Purdy’s paws.

The old tabby’s eyes shone. “That’s right kind of you.” He crouched down and tucked in.

The Clan cats headed for the entrance to the den.

Brackenfur glanced back at Sol, who was stil

standing in the middle of the den.

“Don’t worry,” Sol meowed. “I’l be here when you

get back.”

Brackenfur stil looked uncertain; as they padded

through the entrance, Brambleclaw shouldered his way toward him and murmured into his ear. “Stay on

guard. But keep out of sight.”



Brackenfur gave him a relieved nod and crept

underneath the low-growing branches of a nearby bush, where he crouched with his gaze firmly fixed on the den.

Darkness had fal en while the cats were inside.

The harsh orange light of the Twolegplace covered the sky, blotting out the stars. Hol yleaf wished she could have seen the spirits of the Clan’s warrior ancestors, to know that they were stil watching over her.

Once outside, she headed for the thicket of shiny

green leaves where she had caught her mice.

Hazeltail padded along beside her.

“I’m so glad we found Sol,” she murmured. “Now

we can go home.”

Hol yleaf nodded. “I feel bad about taking Sol away from Purdy,” she confessed.

“But Sol is a murderer!” Hazeltail halted, her eyes

wide with shock. “What if he kil s Purdy, too?”

“He wouldn’t do that,” Hol yleaf replied.

“How do you know?” Hazeltail persisted. “We

need to get him back to the camp fast, before he does any more damage. Firestar wil know what to do with him.”



Hol yleaf shook her head helplessly. There was no

way to reply to Hazeltail’s questions. Besides, if Sol didn’t come back to ThunderClan with them, what would happen in the hunt for Ashfur’s kil er? Would Firestar be forced to look closer to home?

Hol yleaf’s bel y felt cold at the thought of accusations flying around her Clan.

She plunged into the thicket to hunt, but this time

prey didn’t come so easily to her paws. In the end she had to be content with a single shrew; she padded back to Purdy’s den feeling embarrassed, but the rest of the patrol had only found thin pickings, too.

“Prey’s pretty scarce ’round here,” Purdy admitted

as they crouched down to eat. “But I can find enough to feed me and Sol through leaf-bare. I ain’t never starved before!”

He must be so lonely if he’s willing to share this

much prey with a stranger, Hol yleaf thought sadly, swal owing her morsel of shrew.

Once she had eaten, she settled down to sleep.

The stone floor of the den was damp and cold, and

wind whistled through the gaps in the wal s. Huddling next to Lionblaze for warmth, Hol yleaf wished for the thick moss and bracken of her nest in the camp, and

for the sheltering branches of the warriors’ den.





Hol yleaf slept fitful y, and woke to see the cold light of a leaf-bare dawn angling across the floor.

Brambleclaw and Brackenfur were already on their paws; Hazeltail and Birchfal were stirring drowsily, while Purdy slept in a rumpled heap in the opposite



corner.

Sol was curled up in a sheltered niche where a couple of stones had fal en from one of the inner wal s of the den. Brambleclaw padded over and prodded him awake.

“It’s time to leave,” he meowed.

Sol lifted his head, his amber eyes blinking, then

rose to his paws. “If you wish.”

“He creeps me out,” a voice whispered in

Hol yleaf’s ear.

Hol yleaf started and turned to see Birchfal . “Don’t sneak up on me like that!” she snapped, annoyed with herself because Sol was spooking her, too.

“He’s just a cat.”

As she finished speaking, Sol padded past her toward the entrance to the den. “I told you I would come back,” he murmured, quietly enough that she was the only cat to hear.

Struggling to shrug off her feelings of uneasiness,

Hol yleaf roused Lionblaze, and the sound of voices

woke Purdy, who stumbled sleepily over to the remains of the rabbit. “You got to eat something before you go,” he meowed.

“But you need it more than we do,” Brackenfur protested.

“I can catch another,” Purdy retorted, his neck fur

beginning to bristle. “You need to keep your strength up if you’re goin’ on a long journey.”

The ThunderClan cats exchanged glances; clearly

Purdy would be insulted if they refused, so they crowded around the last of the prey and forced down

a few gristly scraps. Purdy watched them, while Sol

just waited in the entrance, his gaze lifted to the sky.

“Don’t go near them monsters,” Purdy instructed.

“They’l flatten you as soon as look at you. And there’s dogs give trouble sometimes. They know not

to mess wi’ me, but youngsters like you…”

“We met the dogs, Purdy,” Hazeltail told him.

“You’re right, they are dangerous. We’l be careful.”

The old tabby tom gave his chest fur a lick, as if

he was pleased to have been helpful. Every mouthful

of prey felt like dust to Hol yleaf. She wished there was something they could do, so that Purdy wouldn’t

be left alone.

When al the cats had finished eating, Hol yleaf said good-bye to Purdy. The old cat was stil trying to stay cheerful, but Hol yleaf could see the loneliness and fear in his eyes. She touched noses with him gently. “May StarClan be with you, Purdy,” she murmured. “I hope we’l meet again.”

“Mebbe we wil .” But Hol yleaf could tel Purdy didn’t believe they would. “You take care now, you hear?”

Brambleclaw led the way to the entrance of the den. Sol rose to his paws and fel in beside the Clan deputy as the cats emerged into the garden. By this

time the sun was up; the sky was the clear, pale blue of leaf-bare, and a faint breeze rustled the leaves on the bushes.

Halfway to the fence, Brambleclaw stopped and

looked back at Purdy, who stood watching them from the nearest gap in the wal .

“Come with us, Purdy,” he meowed urgently.

“There’s room for you in the elders’ den. Firestar wil welcome you.”

Purdy stared at him. “Wel , I…I dunno what to say.”

As sorry as she felt for the old cat, Hol yleaf felt herself bristling inside. This can’t be right! Purdy isn’t a Clan cat. What will the other Clans say? Then she suppressed a shiver. I might not be a Clan cat,

either. Does that mean I should live alone, without

any friends to help me hunt?



any friends to help me hunt?

Sol was looking on expressionlessly. Does he

care about Purdy at all? Hol yleaf wondered.

“Wel ?” Brambleclaw prompted the old cat.

“No, I’l be fine.” Purdy gave his rumpled pelt a shake. “There ain’t no need to feel sorry for me. I’ve survived more than one leaf-bare on my own.”

“We’d appreciate your help getting around this Twolegplace, you know,” Brackenfur meowed,

padding back toward the den. “You know the area far better than we do.”

“And once we’re back in the camp, you’d have a

lot to teach our apprentices,” Brambleclaw put in. “I don’t suppose Hol yleaf and Lionblaze have

forgotten how you saved them from the dogs.”

Lionblaze nodded, while Hol yleaf suppressed a

shudder at the memory of the dogs who had trapped

them in a barn on their way to the mountains. Without Purdy’s quick thinking, she and her brother and Breezepelt would al have been torn to pieces.

“Elders have a lot of influence in the way the Clan

is run,” Brambleclaw went on. “It would be an honor

to have you live with us, with al your experience, and al you know about Twolegs—I mean, Upwalkers.”



Hol yleaf dug her claws into the earth. She knew that the two senior warriors were lying. Bringing another loner into the Clan wouldn’t be easy, and they didn’t need to know about living among

Twolegs, because there were so few of them by the

lake. Why not leave Purdy where he is, if he’s happy? Why do Clan cats always think they know

best?

“Wel , okay.” Purdy scrambled through the gap in

the wal and padded over to join the patrol. “I’l come along as far as the edge of Twolegplace, at least.

Reckon you might need a bit o’ help findin’ your way.” Turning to Sol, he added, “I never finished tel in’ you that story about the fox….”

Brambleclaw led the way to the gap in the fence

where the patrol had entered the night before. Here

he paused, his head raised and his ears pricked, while he tasted the air. The rest of the patrol waited in silence; Hol yleaf closed her eyes, concentrating until she felt the tug at her paws that told her the direction of the lake.

“Do you know which way to go?” Hazeltail fretted,

obviously not trusting her own inner guide.

Brambleclaw nodded. “I think so. I’m trying to remember what we saw from that rooftop.”

“I’m not going up there again!” Birchfal wailed.

“No, there’s no need,” Brambleclaw assured him.

“But one of us can climb a tree soon to check whether we’re going the right way. Let’s get moving.”

Hol yleaf squeezed through the gap in the fence, hard on the Clan deputy’s paws, and found herself on a grass shoulder beside a Thunderpath. They had

crossed here the night before, when al was dark and quiet. Now monsters were rushing up and down.

Their bright colors dazzled Hol yleaf’s eyes; the air was fil ed with their growling and their acrid stink.

“I hate this,” she muttered to Lionblaze. “I don’t care how many times we’ve done it, I’m stil afraid some cat wil get squashed.”

Brambleclaw padded up to the very edge of the Thunderpath until his fur was ruffled by the wind of passing monsters. “When I say run, run as if a whole pack of dogs were behind you.”

Lionblaze sighed. “Wel , we’ve had plenty of

practice.”

Hol yleaf noticed that Brackenfur had positioned himself next to Purdy, as if he intended to keep an eye on the old cat when the time came to cross. Sol



stood on Purdy’s other side, his gaze fixed on the opposite side of the Thunderpath.

A huge monster swept by, the rumbling from its bel y louder than a whole Clan of cats growling at once. As it faded into silence, Brambleclaw glanced

sharply up and down the Thunderpath. “Now! Run!”

Hol yleaf leaped forward, aware of Lionblaze on one side of her and Birchfal on the other. The surface of the Thunderpath was hard under her flying paws. Then she was across, stumbling thankful y onto the grass on the other side.

Turning, she saw that al the cats had crossed safely, except for Purdy, who was weaving erratical y across the middle of the Thunderpath, and

Brackenfur, who padded beside him, trying to urge him on.

“Take it easy, youngster,” Purdy meowed. “There

ain’t no monsters coming.”

“But—” Brackenfur began desperately.

He broke off at the sound of a monster

approaching. As it roared into sight around the corner, he gave Purdy a massive shove from behind.

The old tabby stumbled forward with a startled yowl

and flopped safely onto the grass as the monster and flopped safely onto the grass as the monster swept past, snarling, barely a mouse-length away.

Brackenfur had sprung to safety beside him with a heartbeat to spare.

“Purdy, never scare us like that again!”

Brambleclaw hissed in exasperation.

The old cat picked himself up, blinking. “What?

There weren’t no problem. And there weren’t no need to go pushin’ me around,” he added to

Brackenfur in an injured tone.

Brackenfur sighed. “Sorry.”

“Always panickin’, you young cats,” Purdy

muttered.

Hol yleaf rol ed her eyes. “This journey is going to be interesting,” she whispered to Lionblaze.

Brambleclaw gathered the patrol together with a wave of his tail and set off along the edge of the Thunderpath. Soon Hol yleaf picked up the sound of

many Twoleg kits, their voices shril in the crisp morning air. “What’s that?” she asked, her paws tingling with suspicion.

“Nothin’ to worry about,” Purdy reassured her.

“You’l see.”

Hol yleaf wasn’t sure she could trust the old cat’s



judgment. Rounding the next corner, she saw a huge

Twoleg nest with a wide expanse of stone on the ground al around it. A fence of narrow, shiny trees cut it off from the Thunderpath. Crowds of Twoleg kits—more Twolegs than she had ever seen

together at one time—were running and yowling and

throwing things at one another.

“What is this place?” she meowed curiously.

Purdy shrugged. “Dunno. They come here most

days.”

Hol yleaf’s bel y clenched with shock as the old cat trotted up to the fence and stuck his nose through a gap. At once several of the Twoleg kits ran up to him, stretching out their hands.

“What’s he doing?” Brackenfur muttered. “Purdy!”

Purdy took no notice. The Twoleg kits were

reaching through the fence to stroke him; his purr was loud enough to reach the rest of the patrol where they stood a few tail-lengths away.

“Remember, he used to be a kittypet,” Birchfal murmured. “It must make him act weird sometimes.”

Brambleclaw said nothing, just twitched his tail to

guide the patrol past the shiny fence at a safe distance. They waited for Purdy a few fox-lengths down, alongside the Thunderpath. As they padded past, Hol yleaf noticed one of the kits pul something out of its pelt and hold it out to Purdy, who licked it up enthusiastical y.

Has he no sense?

Eventual y a harsh clanging sounded from inside the Twoleg den, and al the kits ran over toward it and stood in a line to go through the entrance. Purdy turned away and came bounding up to the patrol.

“What’re you al starin’ at?” he demanded, puffing.

“Purdy, was that a good idea?” Brambleclaw

asked. Hol yleaf could tel he was trying to keep irritation out of his voice. “What did that kit feed you?”

“Dunno.” Purdy’s eyes gleamed as he swiped his

tongue around his jaws. “It was real tasty, though.”

Brambleclaw sighed. “Right, let’s go.”

A little farther on, the Twoleg dens became more

widely spaced; then they stopped altogether as woodland took over on either side of the

Thunderpath. Relief flooded through Hol yleaf from ears to tail-tip as Brambleclaw veered away from the Thunderpath to pad under the trees. Before they had

ventured more than a couple of tail-lengths into the wood, he halted.

“This would be a good place to check our

direction,” he meowed. “Who feels like climbing a tree?”

“I wil !” Lionblaze offered instantly.

“No, I wil ,” Hazeltail argued. “I’m lighter. I can get up higher.”

Brambleclaw nodded. “Okay, Hazeltail.”

Lionblaze looked disgruntled while Hazeltail

leaped up the trunk of the nearest tree, digging her claws into the bark. Hol yleaf’s heart thumped as she watched her friend clambering through the leafless branches, higher and higher, until she reached the top of the tree and clung there, swaying in the breeze. Hol yleaf couldn’t stop thinking about how Cinderheart had fal en, back in the forest, and injured her leg.

What do we do if Hazeltail is hurt, when we have

so far to go?

But a few heartbeats later, Hazeltail began to scramble down; soon she reached the lowest branch

and jumped down beside her Clanmates.

“I could see so far!” she exclaimed.

“Are we on the right track?” Brambleclaw asked.



“Are we on the right track?” Brambleclaw asked.

“Yes!” Hazeltail’s fur was fluffed up with

excitement. “I couldn’t see the lake, but I could tel where it is, behind WindClan’s ridge. We need to go

this way”—she gestured with her tail into the trees

—“and we’l get there without going through any more Twolegplaces.”

“That’s great news.” Brambleclaw gave the

younger warrior an approving nod. “Wel done,

Hazeltail.”

Hazeltail’s eyes shone with pride as the patrol set

off again. Now that the path was wider, Hol yleaf noticed that Brackenfur and Birchfal were walking one on each side of Sol.

The loner glanced at each of them, his amber eyes glinting with amusement. “You don’t need to put me under guard, you know,” he mewed. “I’m not going to run away.”

Purdy halted, staring at Sol with a baffled look.

“Under guard? What’s al that about?”

Brambleclaw was forced to halt, too; his whiskers

twitched with irritation as he glanced back. “It doesn’t matter. We have to keep moving.”

“ThunderClan thinks I’ve done something,” Sol



replied to Purdy, ignoring Brambleclaw. “That’s why

they want me to go back with them.”

“Wha’?” Purdy gaped. “That’s fluff-brained!”

Turning to Brambleclaw, he added, “You’re wrong, you know. Sol’s a decent cat. He wouldn’t do nothin’

bad.”

Brambleclaw didn’t try to explain. He just waved his tail, signaling for the patrol to continue, and almost immediately disturbed a pheasant, which

came scrambling out of a clump of bracken with a raucous alarm cal . At the same moment a squirrel,

obviously spooked by the pheasant, dashed out of cover and raced for the nearest tree. Springing forward, Hol yleaf intercepted it and brought it down with a swift blow of her paw.

“Neat catch!” Birchfal cal ed.

Al the patrol gathered to share the unexpected prey, and Purdy’s awkward questions were pushed to the back of every cat’s mind. But Hol yleaf knew he would ask again. And which one of us is going to

tell him the truth?

The patrol headed on through the forest, but not long after sunhigh Hol yleaf noticed that Purdy was getting tired, stumbling and blundering into bracken or brambles. She padded beside him, trying to guide him with her tail, but it was clear that he wouldn’t be able to keep going until nightfal .

Sprinting

ahead,

Hol yleaf

caught

up

to

Brambleclaw. “It’s Purdy,” she mewed. “He’s so tired. What are we going to do?”

Brambleclaw glanced back. “Mouse dung! We

can’t just leave him here.” Clearly the Clan deputy was regretting that he had asked Purdy to join them.

“Okay, we’l stop soon,” he decided. “Do what you can to help him, Hol yleaf.”

“Sure.” Hol yleaf waited for Purdy to stagger up to

her, then padded beside him again. “Do you want to

lean on my shoulder?” she offered.

Purdy glared at her. “You think I can’t manage on

my own? Jumped-up young whippersnapper!”

“Sorry.” Hol yleaf guessed he was angry because

he knew he needed help, but pride wouldn’t let him

accept it. She fel back a couple of paw steps so she could keep an eye on him, and was relieved when Brambleclaw cal ed a halt.

“So soon?” Lionblaze asked, gazing up at where

the sun stil angled through the trees. “We could go a lot farther before it gets dark.”



“I know,” Brambleclaw meowed, with a glance at Purdy. “But we al had a tough time in the

Twolegplace, and we need to hunt and rest. There should be plenty of prey here.”

The place Brambleclaw had chosen to stop was a

smal clearing among huge oak trees. Dead leaves

covered the ground. At one side, a tiny spring trickled between moss-covered stones into a pool.

Purdy stumbled over to it, took a few laps of water, and flopped down in a rumpled heap. Heartbeats later, loud snores came from him.

Sol padded across to a sunny patch of ground and sat down with his tail curled around his front paws. His amber eyes glowed in the golden light. He

clearly had no intention of hunting for himself.

Hol yleaf headed into the undergrowth. The scents

were strong, and she soon caught a mouse and a thrush. Maybe it’s not a bad idea to stop early, she thought as she kicked earth over her fresh-kil . It’s warmer now, so the prey is out and about.

When she had added another mouse to her catch

she hurried back to the clearing to find that her Clanmates were already building a fresh-kil pile near the pool.



near the pool.

Birchfal dragged up a huge rabbit, his tail raised

proudly. “There are more over there.” He gestured with his tail. “We’l eat wel tonight.”

Dropping a mouse and the thrush onto the pile, Hol yleaf took the other mouse over to Purdy and prodded him awake.

The old tabby gave a startled snort, looking

around wildly. “What is it? Foxes? Let me get at

’em!”

“It’s okay, Purdy.” Hol yleaf rested her tail on his shoulder. “I brought you a mouse.”

Purdy blinked. “That’s right good of you.” He began devouring the mouse in famished gulps, then

stopped and moved back awkwardly. “Here—you

have some, too.”

“No, it’s for you,” Hol yleaf mewed. How long has it been since Purdy had a decent meal? “There’s

plenty more.”

When al the cats had eaten—Brambleclaw made

sure Sol was given a share of the catch—they settled down to sleep among the trees. By now the

sun had gone and twilight was gathering. A cold breeze clattered the bare branches.



Hol yleaf noticed that Purdy was shivering. She beckoned Hazeltail over with a wave of her tail.

“Purdy real y can’t look after himself,” she murmured into her Clanmate’s ear. “Let’s sleep beside him and keep him warm.”

“Okay,” Hazeltail mewed, though she looked

doubtful. “I hope he hasn’t got fleas.”

I’m sure he’s got fleas, Hol yleaf thought, as she and Hazeltail clawed together a heap of dry leaves to make a nest. And ticks. We’ll have to give him a

good going-over with mouse bile before we let him

go anywhere near Mousefur!





When Hol yleaf woke, it was stil dark. She could

just make out the trace of bare branches against the sky, but stars stil glittered overhead. Purdy was snoring louder than ever, and Hazeltail was curled up beside him with her tail wrapped over her ears.

Hol yleaf knew she wouldn’t be able to go back to

sleep. Very quietly, so as not to disturb any cat, she rose to her paws and peered around, blinking to clear her bleary eyes. Brambleclaw, Brackenfur, and

Birchfal had al made nests close together on the other side of the pool. Al three of them were sleeping peaceful y; Birchfal ’s tail twitched as if he was dreaming.

Three cats…not four…Sol’s gone! Hol yleaf

swept her gaze around the clearing, but there was no sign of the distinctive tortoiseshel -and-white pelt.

Tasting the air, she picked up his scent; it was stil fresh, but faint.

Hol yleaf’s

first

impulse

was

to

wake



Brambleclaw. But some inner command sent her

paws in the other direction, fol owing the wispy thread of Sol’s scent. She padded as silently as she could through the trees, flinching as her paws crunched in the brittle leaves. She soon began to hear the sound of running water. It grew louder until she came to a spot where the trees thinned out a little, and the ground fel away to where a stream gurgled along over stones. Sol was sitting at the top of the slope, his back to her, his gaze fixed on the paling stars.

“Do you stil think they hold al the answers, Hol yleaf?” he asked without turning his head.

Every hair on Hol yleaf’s pelt rose, until she realized that she was standing upwind of the stream

and Sol must have scented her approach. “I…I don’t

know,” she replied. “I don’t know anything anymore.”

Now Sol turned to her, his amber eyes blinking sympathetical y. “Why is that?”

Hol yleaf sighed. “Everything was so much easier

when I could trust what other cats said.” Even as she spoke, she couldn’t believe she was tel ing this to any cat. She hadn’t even shared her doubts with her

littermates.



“You must learn to trust yourself, Hol yleaf,” Sol meowed, in the deep, rich voice that seemed to inspire confidence. “Only you know what is right.”

“I get so confused sometimes.” Hol yleaf’s voice shook. “I don’t want to have to decide everything on my own.”

“It gets easier, little one.” Sol rose to his paws.

“Come on, let’s go back to the others.”

Hol yleaf’s bel y churned as she fol owed Sol back

to the clearing. He almost destroyed ShadowClan!

Every cat thinks he killed Ashfur! So why do I feel

that I can trust him with my life?

When they reached the clearing, the rest of the patrol were stirring. Brambleclaw looked up from grooming his pelt, a surprised expression in his amber eyes. But al he said was, “I wondered where

you’d got to,” as he padded over to check on Purdy.

The old tabby heaved himself out of his nest. “I’m

fit as a squirrel,” he insisted, shaking dead leaves from his back. “No need for you youngsters to be fussin’.”

After they had finished up the previous night’s fresh-kil , the cats set out again. Passing the place where she had met Sol, Hol yleaf realized they were



coming to the edge of the woods. Soon they stood

beneath the forest’s outermost trees, gazing across

fields dotted with gray-white puffs that Hol yleaf realized were sheep.

“I don’t like this,” Purdy grumbled as they crossed

the fields, giving the sheep a suspicious glance.

“What are them creatures, anyway?”

“Sheep, Purdy,” Hol yleaf replied, padding beside

him. “Didn’t they have any on that farm where we met you last time?”

Purdy sniffed. “Never seen ’em before.” He

jumped, fur fluffing up, as one of the sheep ambled

away from the others and trotted closer to the cats.

“Quick—run!”

“It’s okay,” Hol yleaf mewed; the sheep halted and

began to crop a new patch of grass. “They’re not taking any notice of us.”

“There’s too much…space around here,” Purdy

complained, flattening himself to the ground. “No trees. No Upwalkers—Twolegs, you cal ’em.”

“You

mean

you want Twolegs?” Hol yleaf’s

exasperation spil ed over like rain from a leaf. “That won’t do if you’re going to live in ThunderClan.”

“Hey, take it easy.” Lionblaze veered over and



“Hey, take it easy.” Lionblaze veered over and rested his tail on Purdy’s shoulders for a heartbeat.

“Purdy can’t help not being a Clan cat.”

Nor can we! Hol yleaf almost flashed the words back at her brother, but stopped herself in time. How long before one of us gives away the secret?

With a massive effort she made herself relax. “I know. Sorry, Purdy.”

By sunhigh, Hol yleaf could see that the old cat was tiring again, and soon Brambleclaw cal ed a halt in the shelter of some trees surrounded by gorse bushes. Purdy col apsed on his side, breathing hard.

Sol padded away a few paw steps and sat down, peering out over the field.

“Hey, look at this!” Hazeltail was sniffing at a clump of something that looked like thistledown stuck on one of the gorse bushes. “What is it?”

Hol yleaf padded up to look. Birchfal fol owed curiously. “It smel s of sheep,” Hol yleaf meowed.

Glancing around, she spotted more of the clumps on

other bushes. “Their pelts must get snagged on the

thorns when they brush past.”

“It’s very soft.” Hazeltail tugged at the clump with her teeth and came away with a mouthful of it. “I’m going to take some back for the nursery.”

Birchfal suppressed a mrrow of laughter. “You

look as if you’ve swal owed a thistle!” He ducked as Hazeltail swatted at him with her tail. “It’s a good idea,” he added hastily. “I’l col ect some, too, for my kits.”

Hol yleaf left them pul ing the sheep pelt off the bushes, and padded back to Purdy. The old cat was

reviving, and looked calmer now that the sheep were

a safe distance away.

“Do we have we time to hunt?” she asked

Brambleclaw.

The Clan deputy’s ears twitched in surprise. “Are

you hungry already?”

“No,” Hol yleaf replied, lowering her voice. “I just want one mouse, for the mouse bile. We’l never hear the last of it if we let Purdy into the camp with al his fleas and ticks.” Raising a hind paw to scratch her side, she added, “I think I might have picked something up from him already.”

“Okay.” There was a glint of amusement in

Brambleclaw’s eyes. “But don’t be long. I want to keep going. We’re not far from the lake now. I can feel it in my paws.”





Dusk was fal ing as the patrol left the fields behind and came to a smal Thunderpath. Tasting the air, Hol yleaf breathed in the scent of horses. “The horseplace!” she exclaimed. “We’re nearly home!”

Brambleclaw led the way, slipping under the

shining fence and across the expanse of whitish stone, past the Twoleg nest and the horse nests. As



they emerged into the field, Hol yleaf looked around for the horses, but there was no sign of them. “They must be shut up in their wooden nests,” she

murmured to Lionblaze.

She couldn’t see Smoky or Floss, either, though she picked up their scents. Her paws prickled with urgency; she wanted to be back in the warm

familiarity of the stone hol ow, and yet she knew that there was no real safety there.

Or anywhere else, she reflected sadly. Where will

all the lies and betrayal end?





CHAPTER 15





“Thanks,

Jayfeather,”

Whitewing

purred

as

Jayfeather dropped a leaf wrap of ragwort in front of her.

The nursery was warm and quiet. Daisy and Mil ie

had taken their kits out for some exercise, leaving the white queen to get some rest.

“Make sure to eat it al ,” Jayfeather instructed her.

“Your kits wil be born soon, and you need al the strength you can get.”

“I know.” Whitewing sighed. “I hope it’s not much

longer. I feel huge!”

“You’re fine,” Jayfeather assured her. He said good-bye and pushed his way out of the nursery. The

morning was crisp but he could feel the weak rays of leaf-bare sun, melting the night frost.

“Now,” he muttered to himself, “if only Leafpool’s stil out looking for yarrow….”

He couldn’t pick up his mentor’s scent when he brushed past the bramble screen into the den, but another cat was there, irritation coming off him in waves.

Mouse dung! Jayfeather thought. Now I’ll have to

deal with him.

“Berrynose,” he mewed. “What can I do for you?”

“It’s my tail,” the young warrior told him. “It hurts.

And it smel s funny.”

Jayfeather sniffed at the stump of Berrynose’s tail, and almost recoiled at the rotting scent. “You’ve got an infection,” he reported.



“How?” Berrynose sounded indignant. “Leafpool

said that it healed after I caught it in the fox trap.”

“It did,” Jayfeather agreed. “You must have

opened up the wound again. Can you remember

catching it on anything lately?”

Berrynose hesitated. “I got stuck in some

brambles when I was chasing a rabbit,” he admitted

at last.

“That could do it,” Jayfeather mewed. “But there’s

nothing to worry about. You need a poultice of marigold, that’s al . Wait there a moment.” He padded into the cave where the herbs were stored,

and located the marigold. Chewing up the leaves, he

returned to Berrynose. “Keep stil while I plaster this on,” he mumbled around the mouthful.

“Can I be excused from duties?” the cream-

colored warrior asked hopeful y.

Jayfeather was unsympathetic. “No. You don’t

patrol or catch prey with your tail. But come back here tomorrow and I’l put a fresh poultice on.”

“Okay,” Berrynose mewed. “Thanks, Jayfeather. It

does feel better.”

Right, Jayfeather thought when he had gone. Now

for my plan…He went back into the cave and



col ected a few leaves of chervil, dandelion, and borage. Bounding across to the elders’ den, he set

the leaves down in front of Mousefur.

“Are any of these the herb?” he demanded.

Mousefur let out an annoyed hiss. “What herb?”

Without the bunch of leaves in his mouth,

Jayfeather could smel fresh-kil , and he guessed he had interrupted the elders’ meal. “The herb you told me about, the one Leafpool mixed with your tansy.”

“Oh, that.” The skinny elder stil sounded grumpy.

“What do you want to know for?”

“Just curious.” Jayfeather realized he had

sounded too urgent. He didn’t want Mousefur to tel

Leafpool what he was doing. “You never know, it might be useful.”

Mousefur let out a grunt and gave the herbs a suspicious sniff.

“Let me try, too,” Longtail offered. “I didn’t taste the stuff, but I might remember the scent.”

“Wel ?” Jayfeather asked, when both elders had given the herbs a good sniff.

“No, it wasn’t any of those,” Mousefur meowed. “I

know these herbs. Leafpool uses them al the time for fever and infected wounds.”



for fever and infected wounds.”

“That’s right,” Longtail added. “Sorry.”

Jayfeather suppressed a frustrated sigh. “Not

even this one?” he asked, pushing forward the chervil.

“What part of ‘no’ didn’t you understand?”

Mousefur growled, giving his ear a stinging flick with her tail.

“Okay.” Jayfeather gathered up the herbs again.

“Thanks. I’l bring some more later.”

“Give us the chance to finish this rabbit first!”

Mousefur cal ed after him as he left the den.

Jayfeather returned to his own den, intent on finding more herbs for Mousefur and Longtail to try.

But he had just replaced the chervil, dandelion, and borage in their proper places when he heard

Leafpool enter the den behind him. A strong scent of yarrow came with her.

“Jayfeather, what are you doing?” she asked

sharply. “Why do you smel as if you’ve been sleeping in our supplies?”

“Uh…I fel over in the store,” Jayfeather

stammered. “I got herb dust on my pelt.”

Leafpool let out a long sigh. “Real y, Jayfeather, it’s like having a kit in here! And why were you poking around in the store anyway?”

Jayfeather felt his pelt rising at the anxiety and fear that was flooding from his mentor. Why doesn’t

she want me looking in the store? he wondered. I’ve

as much right to be in there as she has! What is she hiding now?

“I wasn’t poking around,” he retorted. “And I

cleaned the stuff up.”

Leafpool sniffed. “Put this yarrow away, then,” she

ordered. “I want to go check on Mil ie’s breathing.

She’s out there romping around with her kits, and it might be too much for her.”

Once Leafpool had gone, Jayfeather tidied away

the yarrow and slipped out a daisy leaf and a sliver of burdock root. If it’s either of these, I’m a mouse!

Making sure that Leafpool was over by the nursery with Mil ie, he hurried back to the elders’ den.

“You again!” Mousefur muttered. “What is it this time?”

She sniffed briefly at each of the herbs Jayfeather

put in front of her, and tasted the daisy leaf. “No,” she mewed. “It wasn’t them.”

Longtail came over for a sniff, but he didn’t recognize the herbs either.

Jayfeather sighed. “Okay, we’l keep trying.”

“I think you’ve got bees in your brain,” Mousefur meowed as she settled down for a nap.





Jayfeather was eating a vole near the fresh-kil pile when he heard Firestar padding past him, on his way to the medicine cats’ den. Gulping down the last couple of mouthfuls, he fol owed, standing just outside the bramble screen so that he could hear what the Clan leader had to say.

“Leafpool, I wanted to ask you…” Firestar

sounded almost embarrassed.

“Yes?” Leafpool prompted, an edge to her tone.

“I just wondered whether you’ve had a chance to speak with StarClan yet.” Jayfeather could tel that the Clan leader wanted to sound casual, as if the question didn’t real y matter, but he was failing miserably.

Jayfeather’s bel y clenched as he wondered what

Leafpool’s answer would be; then he made himself rela x. The whole Clan would know about it if Leafpool had spoken to Ashfur!

“No!” Leafpool snapped. “If I do, you’l be the first to know.”

“Oh, okay…thanks.” Firestar edged out of the den,

paused, and then bounded off, not even noticing Jayfeather.

Why doesn’t Leafpool want to talk to StarClan?

Jayfeather wondered. What is she so afraid of?

His paws itched to get out of the camp, maybe go

down to the lake, find the stick, and see if Rock would talk to him again. But Rock had told him to look for answers here, among his own Clan.

StarClan, why aren’t you helping me? Jayfeather demanded silently. Isn’t that your job, to guide the Clans?

As if in answer to his unspoken plea, Sandstorm

padded across the clearing and halted beside him.

“Do you want to go for a walk in the forest with me?”

Jayfeather twitched his ears in surprise. “What for?”

Sandstorm let out a faint purr of amusement.

“Can’t I just want your company? No, you’re right,”

she added. “I do need to talk to you, somewhere we



won’t be interrupted.”

“Okay,” Jayfeather agreed. “But I’l have to ask Leafpool first. She’s…wel , she’s a bit touchy just now.”

“I know,” Sandstorm told him. “Wait there.” She brushed past the bramble screen, and Jayfeather heard her meow, “Leafpool, I’m borrowing

Jayfeather for a bit. We’re going into the forest.”

“Al right,” Leafpool replied, though she sounded grudging as she gave permission. “Tel him to fetch

some tansy back with him.”

Jayfeather’s paws tingled as he fol owed

Sandstorm through the gorse tunnel and along the trail that led toward the WindClan border. He had always respected the ginger she-cat, and even

though he now knew that she wasn’t his kin, he stil

trusted her.

Sandstorm said nothing particularly helpful as she

fol owed the stream that marked the border with WindClan. Jayfeather listened impatiently to her comments about how the prey was running and

whether WindClan was likely to make a raid across

the border. But he didn’t object; he knew the she-cat wouldn’t talk until she was ready.



wouldn’t talk until she was ready.

Eventual y they reached the spot where the trees

gave way to moorland, and a cold wind came

whistling down from the ridge that stretched al the way to the Moonpool.

“Let’s rest for a while,” Sandstorm suggested, sitting at the edge of the stream.

Jayfeather padded over to join her, turning until the wind was in his face, enjoying the snow-scented

blast that flattened his pelt to his sides.

“Jayfeather,” Sandstorm began, “do you think

Leafpool is al right? She seems very tense lately.”

So that’s what it’s about! “I’ve noticed that too,” he replied cautiously.

“Is it the strain of dealing with the greencough?”

Sandstorm guessed. “Or something worse? Do…do

you think it’s possible she’s blaming herself for Ashfur’s death?”

Jayfeather sank his claws into the grass to steady

himself.

I didn’t see that coming! He wanted to tel

Sandstorm that the death of Ashfur had nothing to do with Leafpool. I can guarantee it! But he knew how stupid it would be to voice his certainty. It would provoke questions from Sandstorm—questions that

he had no way of answering without bringing the whole of ThunderClan crashing down around his

ears.

“I don’t think so,” he murmured.

“Perhaps she feels she ought to have predicted his death, or stopped it somehow,” Sandstorm went

on. “Or maybe she thinks she should be able to visit him in StarClan and find out the truth.”

Jayfeather

froze. So Firestar hasn’t told

Sandstorm that he asked Leafpool to find Ashfur and talk to him. How many more cats have secrets

from one another?

“I think Leafpool’s tired from dealing with the greencough,” he mewed, knowing he would have to

say something to explain his mentor’s strange mood.

“And I know she’s worried about Whitewing’s kits being born in such a cold season. Besides, every cat is stil grieving for Ashfur.” Well, maybe not every cat… Jayfeather curled up his claws as the lie slipped out.

“You could be right,” Sandstorm sighed. “Firestar

and I are both worried about her. After al she’s not just our medicine cat, she’s our daughter, too.



Brambleclaw and Squirrelflight would feel just the same about you if you were in trouble.”

Or not…Jayfeather found it hard to nod seriously,

hoping that his expression showed none of the turmoil he felt.

“You’l tel me if you find out anything else?”

Sandstorm mewed.

“Of course.” Of course not! As he fol owed the ginger she-cat back to the camp, Jayfeather

wondered which cat would be the next to probe his

secrets, and how long the terrible things he knew could stay hidden.





“Into the nursery now, kits,” Daisy mewed gently.

“It’s time you were asleep.”

“But WindClan are attacking us!” Rosekit

protested. “And I’m going to be Clan leader and fight them off!”

“You can be Clan leader tomorrow,” Daisy

promised.

Jayfeather listened as the kits tumbled into the nursery, their high-pitched voices fading. A chil night breeze ruffled his fur; stretching, he padded off toward his den.

Two sunrises had passed since his conversation

with Sandstorm. Leafpool was stil touchy, and Jayfeather stil didn’t know why. His mentor was afraid of something, that much he was sure of, but he didn’t dare ask for an explanation.

He had just reached the bramble screen when he

heard a yowl from Cloudtail, who was on guard duty

at the end of the thorn tunnel. “Brambleclaw!

Brackenfur! Hey, they’re back!”

Rustling came from the warriors’ den as cats

bounded out into the open. Several of them raced past Jayfeather to greet the returning patrol.

Jayfeather fol owed, but hung back, trying to make sense of the mingled scents as the cats slipped through the thorn tunnel and into the camp.

Brambleclaw was in the lead, fol owed by

Brackenfur. A shiver passed through Jayfeather’s pelt as he recognized the scent of Sol. The loner stepped calmly out of the tunnel and paused at the entrance before padding forward into the camp.

Confidence radiated from him; this was no prisoner



dragged back to answer for his crimes.

A flurry of excited speculation broke out among the Clan cats.

“That’s Sol!”

“They found him!”

“He looks so calm,” Brightheart mewed, sounding

confused. “Surely he wouldn’t look like that if he had kil ed Ashfur?”

“I wouldn’t put anything past that cat,” Dustpelt growled. “Look what he did to ShadowClan.”

“What’s Firestar going to do with him?” That was

Foxpaw’s voice, quivering with excitement. “I think he should rip his pelt off and leave him for the crows.”

“No.” Graystripe’s voice rose strongly above the babble. “That isn’t how Firestar does things. He’l talk to Sol and find out the truth.”

I hope not, Jayfeather thought.

Another cat fol owed Sol into the clearing, with a scent Jayfeather couldn’t place, though he knew he should remember it. Hazeltail fol owed, and last of al came Hol yleaf and Lionblaze. Jayfeather relaxed as

he realized that his littermates had made it home unhurt.

The Clan cats fel silent as Firestar padded past



Jayfeather, their pelts almost brushing. “Greetings, Sol,” he meowed. His tone was cool but polite.

“Thank you for coming.”

“Anything I can do to help,” Sol replied, with equal politeness.

“I’l let you rest for tonight,” Firestar went on. “You must be tired after your journey. Berrynose,

Honeyfern!”

“Yes, Firestar?” The two young warriors bounded

up.

“Make a nest for Sol, would you? That bush

between the medicine cats’ den and the warriors’

den would be a good place. It’s nicely sheltered, tucked under the cliff.”

And there’s a narrow entrance, so it’s easily guarded, Jayfeather added silently.

“Wel done, Brambleclaw, and al of you,” Firestar

continued, when Honeyfern and Berrynose had

hurried off. “I know how difficult this must have been.”

“More than we expected,” Brambleclaw admitted.

“We found Sol in a Twolegplace, with—”

“Wi’

me!”

An

angry

voice

interrupted

Brambleclaw, and Jayfeather suddenly remembered

who the cat was whose scent he hadn’t been able to



who the cat was whose scent he hadn’t been able to

identify. Purdy! What’s he doing here?

“An’ I’d like to know why you’ve dragged Sol al this way!” the old cat went on. “I hope you’re not accusin’ him of somethin’ he hasn’t done!”

An astonished murmur broke out among the

listening cats. Jayfeather wasn’t sure whether

Purdy’s mere presence or his fierce defense of Sol

had provoked it.

“Brambleclaw, who’s this?” Firestar asked,

surprise in his voice.

“His name is Purdy,” Brambleclaw replied. “He’s the loner we met on our first journey to the sun-drown-place. Purdy, this is our Clan leader, Firestar.”

“Welcome, Purdy.” Jayfeather pictured the flame-

colored tom dipping his head to welcome the old tabby into the camp. “You can stay in the elders’ den.

Foxpaw, wil you go with him and introduce him to Mousefur and Longtail?”

“Thanks, Firestar,” the loner meowed. “Sol, just you give me a cal if you need me, okay?” He padded after Foxpaw as the apprentice led the way

toward the elders’ den.

As the old loner retreated, Leafpool padded up and gave Sol’s pelt a thorough sniff. “Were you hurt at al on the journey?” she asked. “Any stiffness in your legs?”

“No.” Sol’s voice was tinged with amusement. “I’m

used to traveling long distances.”

Yes, because no cats want you around for very

long. The sarcastic words rose to Jayfeather’s lips, but he had more sense than to let them out.

“Come on, Sol, I’l take you to your nest,”

Brackenfur announced.

As the two of them padded off, Firestar cal ed quietly to Spiderleg. “You can take the first watch over Sol,” he murmured. “Bring him some fresh-kil , then make sure he stays in the den until morning.”

“No problem, Firestar.” Spiderleg bounded over

to the fresh-kil pile.

Firestar headed back to his own den, leaving the

rest of the Clan clustered together near the camp entrance.

“I’m sure he’s a kil er!” Poppyfrost exclaimed. “Did you see those eyes? He looks as if he could see right through you.”

“I’m too scared to go to sleep,” Icepaw mewed.

“What if he murders us in our nests?”



“Right,” Mousewhisker added. “I don’t know why Firestar let him in here.”

“Firestar needs to find out the truth,” Brightheart meowed.

“And I’m sure there’s nothing to worry about,”

Sorreltail added briskly. “Spiderleg wil make sure that Sol doesn’t get out of his den.”

In spite of the she-cats’ reassurance, Jayfeather’s

paws tingled and the fur rose on his pelt as if a thunderstorm were about to break over the clearing.

The air was tense with fear and uncertainty, as if every cat knew that something huge was hanging overhead.

Trying to ignore his jitters, Jayfeather padded over to where Hol yleaf and Lionblaze had flopped down

together beside the thorn barrier.

“Hi,” he mewed. “How was the journey?”

“Long.” Lionblaze’s voice was bleak. “I thought we’d never get back.”

“We met some other cats,” Hol yleaf added. “They

were having trouble with dogs, and Sol had

encouraged them to fight. Several of them were kil ed, and since then the cats have to battle the dogs every time they set paw outside their den.” She let out a weary sigh. “More damage that Sol’s done.”

“He’s a troublemaker,” Lionblaze agreed, with a yawn.

The question Jayfeather wanted to ask—Do you

think he killed Ashfur?—stayed unspoken. Al he could pick up from his littermates were sensations of weariness, fear, and misery; he didn’t al ow himself to probe deeper into their minds.

“It’s good to have you home,” he told them.

Neither Lionblaze nor Hol yleaf responded.

Jayfeather realized that although he had missed his

brother and sister with pangs sharp as claws, now that they were back, the murdered body of Ashfur stil came between them.

“Come and eat,” he suggested, pushing the

thought away. “Then you both need a good sleep.”

I wonder if we’ll get a chance to talk to Sol, he thought as he fol owed his littermates over to the fresh-kil pile. After all, he’s the only other cat who knows about the prophecy. A new thought occurred

to him: Sol talked as if we were definitely the Three referred to in the prophecy. But we can’t be, because Squirrelflight’s not our mother!

Was this something that Sol didn’t know? Or had



Was this something that Sol didn’t know? Or had

he been lying to them as wel ?





CHAPTER 16





Lionblaze woke to the sound of excited mewing and

movement around him. He lifted his head to see his

Clanmates pushing their way out of the warriors’ den and into the clearing. He staggered to his paws, wincing at the stabs of pain from his aching muscles, and shouldered his way through the branches after them.

The sky was clear, but the sun hadn’t risen far enough to penetrate the hol ow. Deep shadows hung

over the dens and blanketed Spiderleg in near darkness where he crouched, on watch outside Sol’s

nest. But even though it was so early, it looked as if most of ThunderClan was gathered in the clearing.

Daisy, Mil ie, and Whitewing were sitting outside the nursery. Lionblaze saw that they had their tails curled protectively around the kits, who gazed out across the stone hol ow with wide, scared eyes. Foxpaw and Icepaw bounded across to join the warriors, feeling the need to be close to the older, more experienced cats.

Hol yleaf was already up, standing with Hazeltail and Brackenfur. She didn’t glance at Lionblaze, and

somehow his paws wouldn’t carry him over to her.

It’s as if part of us, part of what we used to be, died with Ashfur!

Firestar emerged from his den on the Highledge

and ran lightly down the tumbled rocks to join Graystripe at the bottom. At the appearance of the Clan leader, the excitement in the clearing mounted.

“Here’s Firestar!”



“Now something’s bound to happen!”

Lionblaze flexed his muscles, trying to work the stiffness out of them. He heard a flurry of paw steps, and the dawn patrol raced back into the camp with

Thornclaw at their head.

“What’s going on?” the golden brown warrior

panted as he skidded to a standstil in the middle of the clearing. “Have we missed anything?”

Brambleclaw padded over to him. “What are you

doing here so early?” he demanded. “You can’t have

been al the way along the ShadowClan border.”

“Oh, everything’s quiet,” Berrynose mewed,

peering over Thornclaw’s shoulder. “There’s nothing

to worry about.”

Brambleclaw’s tail-tip twitched. “Al right,” he growled. “But take longer over it next time.” He turned back to the cluster of warriors outside their den. “Hunting patrols,” he announced. “Sandstorm, wil you lead one, please. And Brightheart, you can

—” He broke off, his tail flicking with irritation when he realized that no cat was listening to him.

He glanced frustratedly at Firestar, who padded up to him with Graystripe at his side. “They won’t settle,” Brambleclaw meowed. “No cat even wants to



eat.”

Graystripe nodded, and leaned over to murmur

into Firestar’s ear. Lionblaze just caught the soft words: “You may as wel get this done now.”

Firestar’s

ears

pricked.

“You’re

right.

Brambleclaw, go and fetch Sol.”

Every cat’s gaze was fixed on the deputy as he padded across to the bush where Sol had slept. He

exchanged a quick word with Spiderleg, then

vanished under the branches. A few heartbeats later

he emerged again with Sol behind him.

As the loner padded over to Firestar, the first rays of the sun slid over the rim of the hol ow and shone on his fur. He looked as sleek as if he had spent the last moon grooming his pelt, instead of trekking through the Twolegplace and across open country to

reach the camp. Lionblaze felt tired and scruffy in comparison.

As Brambleclaw escorted Sol to the center of the

clearing, the ThunderClan cats drew back on either

side, their eyes wide and their fur fluffed up.

What’s wrong with them? Lionblaze wondered

with a flash of irritation. Sol’s just a cat! Why are they acting like a lot of cowardly rabbits?



they acting like a lot of cowardly rabbits?

“Sol! Wait for me!” Purdy’s yowl echoed around the hol ow as he erupted from the elders’ den, with Mousefur and Longtail fol owing. They halted just beyond the outer branches of the hazel bush, while Purdy lumbered farther into the clearing. His fur was sticking up on end, covered with scraps of moss, and his eyes blazed with anger.

Brackenfur intercepted him before he could reach

Sol. “Take it easy, Purdy,” he mewed quietly. “No cat is harming Sol. Just keep back with the others.”

Purdy gaped in shock, but before he could reply,

Hazeltail padded up to him and nudged him over to

sit beside her and Birchfal .

Firestar stood face to face with Sol in the middle

of the circle of cats. “Do you know why we’ve brought you here?” he asked.

Sol tilted his head to one side. “A cat has been murdered, and you think I’m responsible.” He

confidently met Firestar’s gaze. His fur gleamed in the pale, cold sunlight.

“You kil ed Ashfur!” Thornclaw snarled at him.

“Yes,” Cloudtail growled. “You were seen on the WindClan border. Don’t try to deny it!”



“Why did you kil him?” Sorreltail demanded.

“What had he ever done to you?”

Sol ignored the hostile yowling and kept his gaze

fixed on Firestar as the Clan leader waved his tail for silence.

“One of our warriors was found in the WindClan border stream, with bitemarks in his throat,” Firestar meowed when the clamor had died down. “Do you deny it was you?”

Sol stared at him without blinking. “Think about what you are saying, Firestar. The truth wil be known when it is time.”

Lionblaze caught a flash of frustration in Firestar’s green eyes. Sol had neither confirmed nor denied the accusation.

“Make him confess!” some cat hissed from the

back of the crowd.

Firestar ignored the fierce words, his gaze stil fixed on Sol. “What were you doing on the WindClan

border?” he asked.

Sol shrugged. “How should I remember? It was

many sunrises ago.”

“Did you see Ashfur there?” Lionblaze could tel how hard Firestar found it to keep his voice even and calm as he questioned the loner.

“Ashfur…?”

“A powerful tom with thick grey fur.” There was an

edge of irritation in Firestar’s tone; Lionblaze guessed that Sol knew very wel who Ashfur was.

Sol shook his head. “I didn’t see any cat there.”

“Did you scent any?”

Lionblaze caught a gleam of amusement in Sol’s

eyes, as if the mysterious loner had picked up Firestar’s increasing desperation. “I scented

ThunderClan and WindClan,” he replied. “But I didn’t recognize any particular scents.”

“Did you hear any sound of fighting?”

Sol blinked slowly. “No.”

Firestar paused, the tip of his tail twitching in frustration. A cold claw seemed to touch Lionblaze’s bel y as he realized that even his Clan leader couldn’t penetrate Sol’s secrets.

“Go and get something to eat,” Firestar mewed eventual y. “But don’t think this is over,” he warned Sol. “We wil speak of this again. Cloudtail, wil you take over guard duty, please?”

“It’l be a pleasure,” the white warrior growled. He padded after Sol and Brambleclaw as the deputy escorted Sol to the fresh-kil pile and then back to the nest, and settled himself under the outermost branches of the bush, his face grim and his pelt bristling.

When Sol had gone, Brambleclaw was able to

organize the hunting patrols, and cats began to leave.

“Al the cats who went to find Sol can have the morning to recover,” the deputy meowed to

Lionblaze. “Make sure you al get a good rest.”

Lionblaze wasn’t sure that would be possible. His

Clanmates crowded around him and the other cats who had made the journey, demanding to know what

had happened.

“Was it hard, trying to bring Sol back?” Poppyfrost

asked.

“Yeah, did he try to escape?” Foxpaw added

excitedly.

“No,” Lionblaze replied. “He was wil ing to come.

He did exactly what we wanted.”

And that’s strange, he added to himself. Does he

have a reason of his own for agreeing to come here? Every hair on his pelt prickled. Does he think he can do to us what he did to ShadowClan?



he can do to us what he did to ShadowClan?

“Were you scared?” Mousewhisker whispered,

his eyes wide as if he was imagining al kinds of disasters. “That cat might do anything.”

“You watch what you’re saying, young ’un!”

Purdy’s voice rang out loudly as the elder came bustling up to the group of cats. “You don’t know what you’re talkin’ about. Sol is a good cat. He’s my friend.”

Mousewhisker jumped back, alarmed by the old

tabby’s fierce protest.

“But he was seen—” Cinderheart began.

“Sol would never hurt another cat,” Purdy insisted,

looming over the younger cats. “Have you al got fluff in your heads?”

“Look, Purdy,” Lionblaze began, trying to think of

how he could convince the old cat.

Sandstorm interrupted him. “It’s okay, Purdy. No cat wil harm Sol if he’s innocent. Come on, let me show you the fresh-kil pile.”

Mumbling something under his breath, Purdy

glared at the younger warriors before al owing the ginger she-cat to lead him away.

“Phew!” Lionblaze glanced at Hol yleaf. “I thought



he was going to knock me out with his dog-breath.”

Hol yleaf was more sympathetic. “Wel , he’s the only one defending Sol just now. Every other cat has already decided that he’s guilty.”

Lionblaze opened his mouth to ask, What do you

think? But Hol yleaf was already padding away, and

the question remained unspoken. Thinking it over, Lionblaze wasn’t sure that he wanted to know the answer.

He was heading back to the warriors’ den to rest

when he heard a cal from Firestar, and spotted the

Clan leader at the foot of the tumbled rocks, beckoning with his tail to gather his remaining warriors around him. As he padded up to the

Highledge, Lionblaze thought that Firestar looked edgy; he was flexing his claws as if he wanted action but wasn’t sure what it should be.

“Leafpool,” the Clan leader began, spotting the medicine cat at the edge of the group, “do you know

of any way we can be sure whether Sol kil ed Ashfur?”

The medicine cat shook her head.

“What about the bitemarks?” Sorreltail suggested.

“Could we get Sol to bite on a leaf, and then measure his teethmarks against Ashfur’s wound?”

“Bril iant!”

Firestar

meowed,

giving

the

tortoiseshel she-cat a warm look of approval. “I’l —”

“It won’t work,” Leafpool interrupted. “Ashfur has been buried for too long.”

“There’s something else we need to think about,”

Graystripe added. “Remember when ThunderClan

kept Brokentail prisoner, back in the old forest? He ended up befriending Tigerclaw and attacking

ThunderClan from within. We can’t trust Sol while he’s inside our camp!”

“Then we’ve got to punish him.” Birchfal lashed his tail. “We can’t let him cause any more trouble.”

“Let’s make him col ect mouse bile!” Poppyfrost’s

eyes gleamed; clearly she was remembering the

tasks she had to do when she was an apprentice.

“We could make him hunt prey for the Clan,”

Brackenfur suggested.

“But then he might escape,” Lionblaze pointed

out.

“We can’t punish him until we’re sure he’s guilty,”

Firestar meowed. “Al we can do is wait. Leafpool, wil you watch for any signs from StarClan? Surely our warrior ancestors know the truth.” He raked his claws across the ground, leaving deep marks in the

wet earth. “Why haven’t they shown us something already?”

Leafpool’s expression was guarded. “StarClan

wil tel us what it wants us to know in its own good time.”

Firestar dipped his head, accepting what his

medicine cat told him. “Then Sol wil stay here under guard until we have more evidence,” he decided.

With another glance at Leafpool, he added, “Until StarClan decides to help us.”





In the days that fol owed, ThunderClan settled into

an uneasy routine of feeding Sol, watching him stretch his legs when he was al owed out into the clearing, and escorting him to make dirt. Sol never lost his air of calm, and he treated every cat with the same friendliness.

Lionblaze waited frustratedly for the chance to talk to him alone. He was desperate to discuss the prophecy. He couldn’t forget the sense of power and

control he had felt when facing the dogs, which convinced him stil that he was one of the Three. But Sol was never left alone, and only the senior warriors were assigned to guard him.

The weather stayed sunny and dry, even though each morning the trees were rimmed with frost.

Sometimes it was even warm enough by sunhigh to

bask on a couple of flattish rocks at the base of the cliff. Mousefur especial y liked to stretch out there, soaking up the sunlight.

“The elders should be al owed to bask here

whenever we want,” she had announced. “Our old bones need it.” She sighed, twitching her ears.

“Back in the old forest, we had Sunningrocks. Al the Clan’s cats could bask there together, if they wanted.”

Since Purdy’s arrival, she had taken to lying on the rocks with him. Lionblaze was surprised at their friendship, but he figured that they talked about things like how rude young cats were these days and



how much tastier prey used to be.

Around sunhigh, several days after the patrol’s return, Lionblaze was strol ing back to the camp with Honeyfern and Berrynose. They had spent the

morning training with Squirrelflight and Brackenfur and the two apprentices; Brackenfur had taken over

as Icepaw’s mentor since Whitewing was so close to

having her kits.

“They’re doing so wel ,” Honeyfern purred. “Did you see how high Icepaw can leap?”

“And Foxpaw can dodge real y quickly,” Lionblaze

agreed. “Squirrelflight made them practice that move over and over again, and they’ve both got it now.”

Berrynose paused to stretch his jaws wide in a yawn. “I feel like lying in the sun for a bit to catch my breath. I wonder if Mousefur wil let us have a turn on the basking rocks.”

“Good idea,” mewed Lionblaze.

Pushing his way through the thorn tunnel, he saw

that Mousefur, Purdy, and Longtail were al snoozing on the flat-topped rocks. Berrynose bounded over to

them eagerly; Lionblaze fol owed with Honeyfern.

But Purdy wasn’t dozing after al . “So my

Upwalker,” he was meowing as they approached,



“he says to me, ‘Purdy,’ he says, ‘there’s only you can get rid of this mouse, and—’” He broke off, blinking as he spotted the younger cats.

Lionblaze noticed that Mousefur and Longtail, to whom Purdy was tel ing his story, were both fast asleep.

“Hi, Purdy,” he greeted the old tabby. “We were wondering if we could bask here with you for a bit.

We’ve been training al morning, and we’re tired.”

“Young cats today—no stamina,” Purdy grumbled,

but he rose to his paws, stretched, then prodded Mousefur and Longtail awake.

“Wha’?” Mousefur woke with a start.

“These young ’uns want to bask,” Purdy explained.

The tip of Mousefur’s tail twitched, but to

Lionblaze’s surprise she didn’t object. “I suppose so,” she muttered. “We’l even leave the rocks to you, providing one of you brings a bit of fresh-kil to our den. I could just eat a good plump vole.”

“I’l do that,” Honeyfern offered, bounding off to the fresh-kil pile.

Mousefur laid her tail on Longtail’s shoulders to guide him down from the rocks, and the three elders

headed off toward their den under the hazel bush.



headed off toward their den under the hazel bush.

“Thanks!” Lionblaze cal ed after them.

“You fel asleep and missed some of the story,”

Purdy mewed to Mousefur as they retreated. “I’d better start it al over again. There was this mouse, see…”

Lionblaze and Berrynose climbed up onto the

basking rocks, and Honeyfern joined them a few heartbeats later. The flat surface was warm where the elders had been lying, and bright yel ow sunlight spil ed down on it. Lionblaze stretched out and let the heat soak into his fur. I wish I could lie like this for ever, he thought, and never have to worry about anything again.

On the rock next to him, Berrynose and Honeyfern

were sharing tongues and watching Mil ie’s kits playing in the clearing close by.

Berrynose bent his head close to the tabby she-cat’s ear. “We’l have kits like that one day,” he purred.

Honeyfern looked up at him, blinking shyly. “I’d like that.”

Lionblaze was surprised at how gentle Berrynose

sounded; he was used to the older warrior being a bossy nuisance, ordering around other cats if he thought he could get away with it. Maybe having Honeyfern as a mate would be good for him.

At least he might stay out of my fur.

The cream-colored warrior rasped his tongue

over Honeyfern’s shoulder. “You’l make a wonderful

mother.”

Watching them together, a pang of loneliness

gripped Lionblaze’s bel y. Who is my mother? Why

didn’t she want me? Closing his eyes, he wondered

what she had been like, and whether she ever thought about the kits she had abandoned.

“Watch me! Watch me!” Blossomkit’s voice came

from a little way across the clearing. “I can leap higher than any cat!”

“No, you can’t, I can!” Bumblekit argued.

Lionblaze opened one eye to see al three of Mil ie’s kits leaping and tumbling around, a couple of fox-lengths from the rocks where he and his

Clanmates lay. Briarkit fel over and rol ed so that she was next to a crack in the rock wal ; leaping up, she balanced on her hind legs with her forepaws stretching up into the air.

“I bet you can’t do this!” she boasted.



In the same instant, Lionblaze spotted a long, dark

shadow emerging from the rock behind the kit. It reared up against the gray stone, but Briarkit was too excited to notice. Lionblaze sat bolt upright.

Snake!

He bunched his muscles to spring, but Honeyfern

was quicker. Leaping down from the rock, she

bundled Briarkit out of the way. The snake arched its neck; before Honeyfern could move it struck down and buried its hooked fangs in her shoulder.

Honeyfern sprang backward with a screech of

pain. “Help!”





CHAPTER 17





Hollyleaf pushed her way through the thorn tunnel with a vole and two mice dangling from her jaws. Her hunting patrol had done wel , but her nose and paws

were numb with cold as she padded over to the fresh-kil pile. The leaf-bare sun didn’t penetrate the shadows under the trees, and the ground there was

stil frozen.

She was dropping her prey on the pile when she

heard a shriek from the base of the cliff, on the far side of the medicine cats’ den. Whirling around, she saw Lionblaze bolt into the middle of the clearing, his pelt bristling as if a whole Clan of enemies were on his tail.

“Help! Come quick!” he screeched. “Honeyfern’s

been bitten by a snake!”



Icy terror coursed through Hol yleaf’s blood as she

rushed across the clearing. They’d never had a snake in the hol ow before! When she reached the cliff, she saw Briarkit cowering at the base of the rocks; the little kit was trembling, her eyes wide with shock. Mil ie bounded up and drew her away with her

tail wrapped protectively around the kit.

Berrynose crouched beside Honeyfern, who was

lying on her side with her paws splayed out; her breath came fast and shal ow, and her eyes were ful

of terror. A thin line of blood on her shoulder showed where the snake had struck.

Sorreltail and Brackenfur raced across from the warriors’ den with the same look of horror in their eyes when they saw their wounded daughter.

Cinderheart, Honeyfern’s littermate, was hard on their paws.

As they skidded to a halt, Sorreltail pressed her muzzle into Brackenfur’s shoulder. “No…oh, no…”

she whispered. “I can’t lose another kit! Not after Molekit! Please, StarClan…”

“Where’s Poppyfrost?” Hol yleaf muttered to

Lionblaze as her brother came running back.

Sorreltail needed al her kits right now.



“Out on patrol,” Lionblaze replied. “She—”

He broke off as Leafpool pushed her way through

the knot of cats. “Stand back and give me some room,” she ordered.

Berrynose glared at her. “I’m not leaving,” he snarled.

Ignoring

him,

Leafpool

crouched

beside

Honeyfern and rested one paw on her shoulder. “Try

not to move,” she meowed.

Hol yleaf waited expectantly for Leafpool to start helping Honeyfern. Surely she would know what to do? But she hadn’t brought any herbs with her, and

she wasn’t doing anything more than sitting beside the trembling tabby warrior.

Leafpool looked up, her gaze sweeping over the

crowd of cats and coming to rest on Cinderheart.

There was a pleading look in her eyes, so desperate

and hopeful that it made Hol yleaf wince. I don’t understand, she thought. What does she want from

Cinderheart?

“Help me!” Honeyfern had begun to twitch and

writhe in pain. “My blood is on fire! Help me, please!

It hurts so much!”

Berrynose stared at Leafpool. “Do something!” he



begged. His gaze swept over the cluster of cats.

“One of you, do something!”

Leafpool didn’t seem to hear him; she just

dragged her gaze away from Cinderheart and

looked down at Honeyfern as she struggled for breath.

Sorreltail slid out her claws, her disbelieving gaze fixed on the medicine cat. “Why aren’t you doing anything?”

Leafpool bowed her head. “I’m so sorry,” she

whispered. “There’s nothing I can do. The poison has taken hold of her.”

Sorreltail raised her head and let out a yowl of anguish, while Brackenfur wrapped his tail around her shoulders and drew her close.

Honeyfern’s legs folded into her bel y, and her back arched in agony. When the spasm passed she

lay limply, her chest hardly moving to show that she was stil breathing. Her legs continued to twitch; her eyes had begun to glaze over.

In silence, Hol yleaf and the rest of the cats shuffled backward to give Berrynose space to help Honeyfern on her journey to StarClan. The cream-colored tom crouched over her, stroking her fur with colored tom crouched over her, stroking her fur with one paw. “We would have had wonderful kits

together,” he murmured. “Just as strong and beautiful as you. And one day I’l see you in StarClan.”

Honeyfern’s jaw moved and a rasping sound

came from her throat, as if she was trying to reply.

“You saved Briarkit’s life,” Berrynose went on, bending his head to lick the dying she-cat’s head.

“Every cat in StarClan wil honor you.”

A long sigh came from Honeyfern. Hol yleaf

watched helplessly as her friend’s limbs grew stil and the rise and fal of her chest faded away. Final y, her blue eyes stared sightlessly into the sky.

Pain as sharp as the snake’s bite pierced

Hol yleaf. She gazed at Cinderheart’s horrified expression, trying to imagine how she would feel if she lost one of her littermates.

No! Hol yleaf dug her claws into the earth. That must never happen!

Leafpool moved toward Honeyfern’s body, but

Brackenfur stopped her. Instead he padded up to Berrynose and rested his tail on the young warrior’s shoulder. “She’s gone,” he told him. “She hunts with StarClan now.”



As gently as if he were Berrynose’s father,

Brackenfur nudged him to his paws and led him away, then nodded to Leafpool. The medicine cat crouched beside Honeyfern with a paw on her chest

to check for any signs of breathing. Shaking her head slightly, she mewed to Lionblaze, “Find some warriors to help carry her body into the clearing. We need to get her away from the cliff in case the snake is stil around.”

“I’l help,” Hol yleaf offered instantly.

Lionblaze beckoned with his tail to Spiderleg and

Thornclaw, and together the four cats lifted

Honeyfern’s limp body and carried it to a shaded spot not far from the warriors’ den.

As they were crossing the clearing, Graystripe appeared through the thorn tunnel, his jaws ful of prey. Poppyfrost and Mousewhisker fol owed him

into the camp. As soon as she saw her sister’s body, Poppyfrost dropped her fresh-kil and raced over.

“What happened?” she wailed. “Honeyfern, wake

up!”

Sorreltail padded up to her and guided her along

after Honeyfern’s body, their pelts brushing, until the warriors set the dead she-cat down and her kin could huddle together around her, comforting one another as they kept vigil.

The sun stil shone, but Hol yleaf felt as if ice were creeping through the hairs on her pelt, and she couldn’t stop shivering. “Are you okay?” she asked Lionblaze. “You saw it al happen.”

Lionblaze gave her a bleak nod but didn’t speak.

“Honeyfern wil be a great loss to her Clan.”

Hol yleaf started as she heard Sol’s voice, and turned to see that the loner had left his nest.

Thornclaw must have left him unguarded when he came to see what was happening. Sol’s amber eyes

shone with sadness and his head was bowed as if

he genuinely grieved for the young she-cat.

“It’s hard when a life is cut off so early,” he added.

Hol yleaf knew she should send him back to his nest, but she couldn’t summon the energy. Al the other cats seemed too distracted by their grief to worry about what Sol was up to.

He might as well stay, she thought. What harm is

he doing?

Purdy and the elders had appeared, too, padding

up and mingling with their Clanmates.

“There’s nothin’ worse than losin’ a young cat,”



Purdy meowed. “She’d al her life stretchin’ in front of her.”

“She was a fine cat,” Mousefur agreed. “The last

thing she ever did was fetch me some fresh-kil .”

Al the cats were mil ing around in the center of the clearing, unsure what to do. Hol yleaf was relieved when Graystripe strode into the middle of them, raising his tail for silence.

“Mousewhisker,” he directed, “go and fetch

Firestar. He took a hunting patrol toward the old Twoleg nest. Brambleclaw is on a border patrol, so

we’l have to wait for him to come back, as I don’t know where he’l be right now,” he added as

Mousewhisker pelted off. “Leafpool, can you check Briarkit, to make sure she’s okay?”

Leafpool nodded; she looked glad to have

something to do. Mil ie guided her kit over to the medicine cat and waited, her claws scraping the ground and her eyes frantic with worry. Daisy fol owed, keeping a watchful eye on al the other kits, who seemed as shocked as Briarkit.

As Leafpool sniffed the kit al over, Hol yleaf murmured to Lionblaze, “She must be al right.

Honeyfern can’t have died for nothing.”



Honeyfern can’t have died for nothing.”

Final y Leafpool nodded. “She’l be fine,” she told

Mil ie. “I’l give her a poppy seed so she gets a good night’s sleep.”

“But what about the snake?” Daisy wailed. “We’ve

never had one in the camp before.”

“Yes, what about it?” Mil ie added. “We’ve got to

do something. More cats might die.”

Graystripe turned to Lionblaze. “Show me exactly

where the snake struck.”

Hol yleaf fol owed her brother and Graystripe

across the clearing toward the basking rocks. She admired the way the gray warrior had taken over; he

must have been a good Clan deputy back in the forest, she realized.

“That’s the crack that the snake came out of.”

Lionblaze pointed with his tail toward a deep cleft in the cliff face. “I didn’t see if it went back in there.”

Very cautiously, Graystripe approached and

sniffed along the cliff, peering into every crack. “No sign of it,” he reported, returning to Lionblaze. “But it could be anywhere. Some of these cracks are very

deep. There’s plenty of room for it to hide.”

Hol yleaf’s paws tingled with fear. How could they



go on living in the stone hol ow, when death might come sliding silently out of the cliff at any moment and strike down another cat?

“Mil ie’s right,” she meowed. “We have to do

something.”

Before Graystripe could reply, there was a flash of

flame-colored fur at the entrance to the tunnel, and Firestar raced back into the camp. Graystripe

bounded over to meet him. Hol yleaf watched as her

leader’s expression changed from anxiety to horror,

and he padded over to Honeyfern’s body, where he

crouched down beside her grieving kin.

Hol yleaf was just close enough to hear what he said. “I’m so sorry.” Firestar’s voice was shaking.

“Honeyfern should have been safe here. I promise you I’l never let anything like this happen again.”

But how can you stop it? Hol yleaf wondered. It’s

not your fault. You couldn’t have known there was a

snake hiding under the cliff.

Mousewhisker had fol owed Firestar into the

camp, along with Dustpelt and Birchfal , the rest of Firestar’s patrol. They were soon joined by

Brightheart and Jayfeather, each carrying a bunch of catmint. Their dazed expressions told Hol yleaf that Mousewhisker must have met them, too, and passed

on the terrible news. Last of al , Brambleclaw’s patrol returned from checking the WindClan border; their cries of shock and anguish echoed around the

hol ow. Hol yleaf longed to go back to her nest in the warriors’ den and bury herself in the moss and bracken with her eyes shut tight. Perhaps

Honeyfern’s death would turn out to be just a terrible dream.

Before her paws could carry her there, she saw Firestar bounding up the rocks to stand on the Highledge. “Cats of ThunderClan!” He raised his voice to carry to every part of the stone hol ow. “A dreadful thing has happened, but we must stay calm.

Honeyfern died a warrior’s death, protecting a kit of her Clan. We wil mourn her, not just tonight, but for al the moons to come. And we must make sure that

the snake doesn’t come back to hurt any other cats.”

“Tel us what to do, and we’l do it,” Brambleclaw

cal ed out.

Firestar dipped his head to his deputy. “To begin

with, we’l make a barrier of brambles across that part of the cliff. Dustpelt, wil you take charge of that?” The brown tabby warrior gave a curt nod. “No



cat must go near it. Mil ie and Daisy, make sure that your kits understand. And it’s best we don’t use the basking rocks anymore. Snakes usual y sleep during

leaf-bare, but I think this one must have been disturbed by cats sunning themselves on the stones.”

Hol yleaf saw Purdy and Mousefur exchanging a

shocked glance. “That might have been us!” Purdy exclaimed.

Mousefur hung her head, and her eyes fil ed with

sorrow. “Better it had been me, than that poor young cat,” she murmured.

“Okay,” Firestar meowed. “Get on with your

duties, al of you. Tonight we wil keep vigil for Honeyfern.” He ran lightly down the rocks again and

bounded across to Brambleclaw.

“Lionblaze!” Dustpelt cal ed. “Help me with the barrier, please. You can take Foxpaw and Icepaw into the forest to col ect brambles.”

“Coming,” Lionblaze replied. He paused briefly to

touch noses with Hol yleaf, then raced off to round up the two apprentices.

Daisy and Mil ie were gathering their kits together

and bundling them back toward the nursery. “Don’t any of you dare go near that part of the cliff,” Mil ie any of you dare go near that part of the cliff,” Mil ie meowed sternly. “You heard what Firestar said.”

“We won’t.” Blossomkit’s mew was high-pitched

with fear, and al the kits looked unusual y subdued.

Whitewing was fol owing them back to the nursery

when Birchfal bounded over to her and pressed his

nose into her shoulder. “You wil be careful, won’t you?” he fretted.

The white she-cat blinked at him, her eyes ful of

love. “Of course I wil . You don’t have to fuss.”

Birchfal angled his ears toward Berrynose, stil crouched silently over the body of Honeyfern. “I won’t lose you to StarClan,” he insisted. “Not for a long, long time.”

Whitewing and Birchfal leaned into each other, their pelts brushing and their tails twined together.

Hol yleaf stood stil as the rest of the cats moved

away. She didn’t know what to do. She wanted to go

and comfort Cinderheart, but she didn’t dare disturb Honeyfern’s grieving kin. She had begun to pad uncertainly toward the warriors’ den when Leafpool trotted up to her.

“Hol yleaf, could you help Brightheart to put the herbs away?” she asked. “Jayfeather and I are going



to check the queens and kits for signs of shock.”

“Sure.” Hol yleaf was relieved to have something to do. She retrieved Jayfeather’s share of the catmint and carried it to the medicine cats’ den, where Brightheart was already sorting through her bundle of stems. Hol yleaf joined her; it was good to breathe in the scent of herbs that drifted around the den; it reminded her of when she had been

Leafpool’s apprentice. I used to get worried when I couldn’t remember which herb was which. If only that was all I had to worry about now!

“I wish we knew a herb to cure snakebite,”

Brightheart murmured sadly as her forepaws flicked

through the leaves, deftly stripping off any that were shriveled or damaged.

Hol yleaf nodded, but she knew that no amount of

wishing would bring Honeyfern back. Her ears

flicked up at the sound of a cat brushing past the bramble screen; she glanced over her shoulder to see Leafpool coming in.

“I need some poppy seeds for Daisy,” the

medicine cat explained. “She’s getting hysterical.”

“I can’t say I blame her,” Brightheart mewed. “If I had kits now, I’d be terrified.”



Leafpool col ected the seed in a leaf wrap and was about to leave the den when Firestar put his head around the brambles.

“Yes?” Leafpool asked; there was an edge to her

tone that Hol yleaf didn’t understand.

“We need to make sure the snake isn’t a threat to

us,” Firestar meowed quietly.

Leafpool blinked, puzzled. “What do you want me

to do? I can’t summon the snake out of its hole.”

“No,” Firestar replied, “but you can make sure that

it never reaches the main part of the camp. I want you to put deathberries around the place where the

snake came from.”

Hol yleaf felt her paws freeze to the ground as soon as the Clan leader mentioned deathberries.

She exchanged a shocked glance with Brightheart.

Every cat knew that Leafpool refused to have

deathberries in the camp because they were so dangerous.

“Firestar, you know—” the medicine cat began.

“Explain to the kits, and to every single cat, what

the berries are and why they mustn’t be touched or

eaten,” Firestar interrupted her. “They’l understand.

We have to do this. I wil not lose another cat this way.”

Leafpool hesitated, then nodded reluctantly. “Very

wel . Jayfeather and I wil col ect some today. But I don’t like it,” she added more forceful y. “If the deathberries don’t kil the snake within one moon, we’l have to try something else.”





CHAPTER 18





Lionblaze led Foxpaw and Icepaw into the forest to

col ect brambles. He felt numb; the terrible scene kept repeating itself endlessly behind his eyes.

Was there anything I could have done? If I’d been quicker…maybe if I’d leaped for the snake I

could have killed it first.

Both the apprentices were stil trembling with fear, spooking at every leaf rustle, as if they thought that a snake might be hiding in every hol ow. And for all I know, they’re right.…



“I can’t believe we’ve got Sol and a snake in the camp,” Icepaw mewed, jumping aside with her fur bristling as an oak leaf drifted to the ground beside her.

“I wonder if Sol summoned the snake to kil

Honeyfern,” Foxpaw added, his voice shaking.

“Don’t be ridiculous!” Lionblaze’s voice came out

louder than he’d intended; both apprentices jumped

backward. “The snake was just there. It could easily have bitten Sol instead of Honeyfern.”

“I wish it had,” Foxpaw muttered.

Lionblaze didn’t say anything. Hadn’t there been enough death in the Clan already?

He led the apprentices to a bramble thicket near

the beginning of the old Thunderpath and crawled underneath to bite the long, thornless stems at the bottom. The two apprentices hesitated at the edge of the stone, blinking nervously.

“Come on!” Lionblaze urged them. “What’s the

matter?”

“Are there any snakes in there?” Icepaw

whimpered.

“If there are, I’m dead,” Lionblaze replied irritably.

“Okay,” he added with a sigh. “I’l bite through the stems, and you drag the tendrils out.”

For a while they worked steadily, and the pile of bramble tendrils began to grow. Then Foxpaw

stopped with the end of a stem in his mouth.

“What’s wrong?” Lionblaze asked. “I need you to

get that out of the way so I can reach the next one.”

Foxpaw dropped the tendril. “I can smel

WindClan!”

Icepaw let go the stem she was dragging to the pile and tasted the air. “No, it’s RiverClan!” she exclaimed.

Quickly Lionblaze wriggled his way out of the thicket and took a deep breath. “You’re both right,”

he meowed, his neck fur beginning to rise. “And there’s ShadowClan scent as wel .”

Foxpaw laid his ears flat and crouched low to the

ground. “Are we being invaded again?” he shrieked.

“I don’t think so.” Lionblaze forced himself to stay calm. “The scents aren’t strong enough for lots of cats.” Gesturing with his tail, he added, “Stay behind me. And don’t do anything unless I tel you.”

The two apprentices huddled together, close to his hind paws, while Lionblaze faced the

undergrowth

from

where

the

scents

were



undergrowth

from

where

the

scents

were

approaching. A clump of bracken quivered, and

Blackstar of ShadowClan stepped into the open, fol owed

by

Rowanclaw. A

heartbeat

later

Leopardstar and Reedwhisker appeared, and hard

on their paws came Onestar and Turnear.

All three leaders! Lionblaze stared at them, his heart racing. What kind of patrol is this?

“Greetings, Lionblaze.” Blackstar dipped his

head. “We need to speak with Firestar.”

“O-okay,” Lionblaze meowed. “Fol ow me.

Foxpaw, Icepaw, bring back the brambles, please.”

Leaving the apprentices to their task, he led the visitors back to the stone hol ow and through the thorn tunnel. The clearing was quieter than when he

had left. Honeyfern’s body stil lay in the shade. Her family crouched around it, keeping vigil alone until nightfal . Sol had disappeared; Thornclaw was back

on guard duty outside his nest. The queens and kits

had retreated into the nursery.

Firestar was standing in the middle of the

clearing, talking to Graystripe and Brambleclaw. Al three cats looked up in surprise as Lionblaze emerged with his unusual patrol fol owing.



“Greetings,” Firestar mewed, dipping his head

courteously to the other Clan leaders. His tone was

wary, and his neck fur had begun to bristle. “What can I do for you?”

Blackstar didn’t bother to return his greeting. “Is Sol here?” he demanded.

“And is it true that he kil ed Ashfur?” Leopardstar

added.

Onestar bared his teeth in a snarl. “When were you going to tel us that you’re keeping a murderer captive?”

Firestar’s ears pricked and his tail-tip twitched from side to side. Lionblaze could see shock in his

green eyes. “How did you find out so quickly?” he asked.

“One of my patrols saw your cats returning with Sol along the edge of the lake,” Onestar replied, his voice tense with anger. “They told a RiverClan patrol, and RiverClan passed on the news to ShadowClan.”

Firestar’s gaze flicked from one leader to the next.

“Since when was this any of the other Clans’

business?” he meowed icily.

“Since you put our Clans in danger,” Leopardstar

retorted.



“Yo u know how much of a threat that cat is,”

Onestar added, his forepaws kneading the ground.

“And yet you brought him back into our territories!”

Blackstar took a pace forward. Lionblaze could hardly believe that he would attack Firestar in the ThunderClan camp, but he braced his muscles ready

to defend his leader if any of the other cats so much as raised a paw.

“Have you forgotten what Sol tried to do to

ShadowClan?” Blackstar hissed. “He tried to force us to stop believing in StarClan!”

And I’m a mouse! Lionblaze thought cynical y. A

look flashed between Graystripe and Brambleclaw, tel ing Lionblaze that the senior warriors shared his thought. Blackstar wasn’t prepared to admit any responsibility, though at the time he had been only too wil ing to listen to Sol.

“What are you going to do with him?” Leopardstar

demanded.

Firestar hesitated. He was looking increasingly harried, but he kept his claws sheathed. “I haven’t decided,” he admitted. “We’re stil trying to find out exactly what happened.”

Onestar’s nostrils flared and he narrowed his



eyes. “Sol is too dangerous to keep anywhere near

the lake. You should send him away now.”

“You should have left him where he was,”

Leopardstar growled. “Any cat with a flea’s worth of sense would see that.”

“Then Ashfur’s murder would have gone

unpunished,” Firestar argued.

“Vengeance isn’t everything,” Onestar spat. “You have put al our Clans in danger by bringing Sol back. Whatever happens next, you wil not have our

support.”

The other two leaders nodded in agreement, and

a threatening murmur came from their three

fol owers. A chil ran through Lionblaze, though hot blood was pounding in his veins; he wanted to slice

his claws through the fur of these arrogant cats. They have no right to interfere in ThunderClan’s

business like this!

Blackstar raised his chin. “Sol must be gone from

Clan territory by the next Gathering,” he insisted. “Or we wil unite our three Clans to get rid of him ourselves.”





CHAPTER 19





Jayfeather padded in Leafpool’s paw steps as she

climbed to the ridge where the trees thinned out and pine needles prickled under paw. He felt the ground

grow damp and his paws slipped as he scrambled

down the other side into a tangle of undergrowth. As he regained his balance, he picked up the tang of yew bark and berries.

“Here we are,” Leafpool meowed. “I’m going to climb the tree and bend down a branch so you can

reach it.” She nudged him forward a couple of paw

steps. “Stand just there.”

Jayfeather listened to his mentor scramble up the

tree, and a few heartbeats later felt the touch of the yew branch on the top of his head. His fur bristled at the overwhelming scent of deathberries.

“Reach up as high as you can.” Leafpool’s voice

came from just above him. “There’s a stem with berries just there. Be very careful.”

Like you need to tell me! Jayfeather thought.

He stretched upward, his front paws lifting from the ground, until a feathery twig poked him in the face and he felt the heavy clump of deathberries touch his fur. He managed to fasten his teeth into the stem where it met the branch, and felt Leafpool’s muzzle press close to his as she helped him bite it

through.

Waves of unhappiness were flooding from the

medicine cat, shocking Jayfeather so much that he almost lost his balance. He had to shuffle his hind paws, wedging them more firmly among the damp pine needles, before he could go on nibbling at the

twig with its deadly load. Leafpool was fil ed with gnawing anxiety about bringing more death into the

hol ow; she was saturated with sorrow, so ful of grief that she could hardly move.

Yet her voice was steady as she mewed, “That’s

it,” and Jayfeather felt the twig fal to the forest floor just beside his paws. He relaxed, rol ing his shoulders to get rid of the strain of stretching, then picked up the clump of berries by the end of the twig, careful not to let any of the deathberries touch his mouth.

A light thump beside him told him that Leafpool had leaped down from the tree. “If you carry that,”

she told him, “I’l fol ow behind and make sure that none of the berries fal off. It doesn’t matter so much up here, but I don’t want to scatter any of them near the camp.”





When they emerged from the thorn tunnel, the

clearing seemed ful of cats, their voices buzzing like an angry swarm of bees. Jayfeather located

Lionblaze and padded up to him, setting the

deathberries down for a moment to ask, “What in StarClan’s name has happened now?”

“The other three Clan leaders were here.”

Lionblaze’s voice was a low, furious growl. “They told Firestar he has to get rid of Sol by the next Gathering, or they’l get rid of him themselves.”

“What?” Jayfeather lashed his tail. “What right do

they have to tel ThunderClan what to do?”

He could feel sparks of anger coming from

Lionblaze. “They don’t care that Ashfur was kil ed,”



his brother snarled. “They’re like scared rabbits, convinced that Sol is going to leap out and tear them apart. Firestar can’t give in to them!”

Jayfeather murmured agreement, but his paws

tingled with unease. He didn’t like that the other Clans knew al about Ashfur’s murder. The ripples of the gray warrior’s death were spreading farther and

farther, and there was no sign that the effects would fade away.

He tried to shrug off the uneasy feeling as he heard Leafpool cal ing him. “Jayfeather, put the berries on this leaf. We have to make sure that al the kits know how dangerous they are.”

She set a flat leaf down in front of Jayfeather, who laid the clump of deathberries on top of it. Then he fol owed his mentor as she dragged the leaf across

the camp to the nursery. “Fetch Foxpaw and Icepaw,

too,” she added.

Jayfeather tasted the air and located the two apprentices near the cliff where Dustpelt was

building the barrier. “Foxpaw! Icepaw!” he cal ed, jerking his head. “Leafpool wants you.”

“Coming!” Icepaw cal ed.

Jayfeather caught a grumble from Dustpelt. “I



suppose we’l get this barrier built this side of greenleaf. Come right back when Leafpool’s

finished with you!” he ordered the two apprentices.

“Mil ie! Daisy!” Leafpool cal ed when Jayfeather caught her up outside the nursery. “Bring the kits out here, please.”

“Why?” Daisy’s voice was drowsy from the poppy

seeds.

“There’s something I need to show al of you.”

Leafpool and Jayfeather waited while the two

queens herded their kits outside; Whitewing fol owed them, crouching in the entrance tunnel.

“Now,” Leafpool began, “do you see these

berries?”

Jayfeather could feel the kits’ curiosity, though they were stil subdued and didn’t answer Leafpool.

“They look tasty,” Bumblekit ventured after a

heartbeat.

“No! They’re not tasty!” Leafpool’s voice quivered

with anger and disgust. “These berries are evil.

They’re cal ed deathberries, and if you eat just one of them, you won’t just get a bel yache, you’l die. There won’t be anything a medicine cat can do for you.”

Jayfeather knew that wasn’t entirely true. Mousefur



had told him that Cinderpelt had saved Sorreltail after she ate deathberries by making her sick, but it had been a close cal . Leafpool had to scare the kits thoroughly, though, so they wouldn’t dream of going

near the deathberries.

“Then why have you brought them into the camp?”

Daisy fretted.

“Because Firestar wants to use them to kil the snake,” Leafpool replied. “I need to make sure that every cat knows not to go near them.”

“Did you hear that?” Mil ie asked the kits sharply.

“Take a good look, so you’l recognize them again.”

“We’l be careful,” Rosekit mewed, sounding

scared. The rest of the kits murmured agreement.

“Foxpaw? Icepaw?” Leafpool prompted.

“We’l remember,” Foxpaw meowed. “We won’t

touch them.”

“We’l keep a lookout for them when we’re out in

the forest, too,” Icepaw added.

“Good. Then you can go. But don’t forget what I said.” Leafpool began to drag the leaf with its deadly load back across the camp, but halted and turned to

Jayfeather. “Bring me a mouse from the fresh-kil pile, please.”



pile, please.”

Jayfeather bounded off, returning with the mouse

to the medicine cats’ den. “It’s a good plump one,”

he meowed.

“I’m not going to eat it,” Leafpool told him. “This is for the snake. I’m going to stuff it with deathberries.

Put it down and keep your paw on it to hold it steady.”

“You’l get poison on your paws!” Jayfeather

exclaimed.

“No, I’m going to use a stick to push the berries down the mouse’s throat.”

As he clamped his paw firmly over the mouse, Jayfeather could feel his mentor’s revulsion at what she was doing. He could almost read her thoughts.

I’m a medicine cat! I’m supposed to cure, not kill!

But he said nothing while Leafpool went on shoving

the deadly berries into the body of the mouse.

I’ll only get my fur clawed off if I try to talk to her.

Final y Leafpool let out a sigh. “There, that should do. I’ve poked some thorns in there, too. They’l cut the snake from inside and send the poison more quickly around its body.”

Jayfeather nodded. He was surprised by how



much his mentor hated using her skil s like this, seeing as her victim was the snake that had kil ed Honeyfern. He had been fascinated to discover that

there were plants that would harm instead of heal. I wonder if there are others.…

Leafpool laid the prepared mouse back on the

leaf and dragged it out into the clearing again, over to where Dustpelt was building the bramble barrier around the snake’s hole. Lionblaze and the two apprentices were helping him.

Jayfeather padded over to his brother, while

Leafpool explained to Dustpelt what she had done.

“Good idea,” the brown tabby warrior grunted. “I’l

put it behind the barrier near the hole.”

“Be careful,” Leafpool warned him.

“I’l be fine,” Dustpelt meowed, sounding unusual y

gentle as he reassured the medicine cat. “Look, I’m

picking it up by the tail.” Jayfeather heard him leap across the barrier and a moment later leap back.

“There,” he meowed. “Al done. Right, what are you

waiting for?” he added, swinging around to face his

helpers. “Let’s get this barrier finished.”

Back in their den, Jayfeather and Leafpool

wrapped the rest of the deathberries in the leaf.



“We’d better store them in case the mouse doesn’t

work the first time,” Leafpool explained. “I don’t like it, but—”

A loud wail interrupted her. “Leafpool! Leafpool!”

“What now?” Jayfeather groaned.

He picked up Birchfal ’s scent as the young

warrior crashed past the bramble screen. “Leafpool,

you’ve got to come at once!” he panted. “Whitewing

has pains in her bel y.”

“Al right, don’t panic.” Leafpool rose to her paws.

“I’m sure it’s nothing serious. Maybe her kits are coming. Jayfeather, put that leaf wrap away,” she instructed as she brushed past him. “Right at the back of the store where no cat wil pick it up by mistake.”

Gingerly Jayfeather pushed the leaf wrap in front of him and crept al the way to the back of the store, among a litter of old folded leaves and piles of shriveled herbs. “We need to clear this lot out,” he muttered as he pushed the deathberries into the farthest corner.

Crawling back into the den, he twitched his

whiskers with disgust. His pelt was covered with herb dust and clinging stems. He had just begun to



groom one shoulder when Leafpool returned.

“Whitewing’s fine,” she reported. “It’s just a bel yache. I’l take her a couple of juniper berries.”

She ducked quickly into the store and out again with the berries in a leaf wrap. “I’ve just remembered,”

she mumbled around her mouthful. “With al this trouble, I forgot to check on Purdy’s sore pads. Can you go and do it now?”

“Sure,” Jayfeather sighed, resigning himself to putting up with a messy pelt for a bit longer. He fetched the ointment of yarrow from the store and padded over to the elders’ den.

As he crawled under the outer branches of the hazel bush, he heard Purdy’s voice. “What I don’t understan’ is why you’re al against Sol. Those other leaders who came here today, they want Firestar to

get rid of him!” The old tabby sounded flustered.

“Why won’t any of you listen when I tel you he’s a good cat?”

“Purdy, you’re not listening when other cats tel you what Sol did here.” Mousefur sounded as if her patience was wearing thin.

And there was never that much of it anyway,

Jayfeather thought as he paused at the edge of the



Jayfeather thought as he paused at the edge of the

den.

Purdy snorted. “Some nonsense about tel in’ other

cats what to believe in. They didn’ have to listen if they didn’ want to.”

True!

Jayfeather

suppressed

a mrrow of

amusement. Purdy’s not as stupid as some cats

seem to think!

“StarClan is very important to us, Purdy,” Longtail

murmured. “You’l understand if you stay with us.”

“Cats in the sky!” Purdy snorted again.

“Hedgehogs wil fly before I believe that. Anyway,” he went on, “that’s nothin’ to do with how Firestar is treatin’ Sol now. It’s not natural, keepin’ a cat penned up like that. Firestar needs to come to his senses an’ let Sol live with the rest of the Clan.”

Jayfeather padded forward; he could sense

Mousefur’s anger growing and wanted to prevent a quarrel. Spotting him, Mousefur let out a hiss of annoyance and went to crouch in the farthest corner

of the den.

“Hi, Purdy. I’ve come to look at your pads,”

Jayfeather announced.

“About time,” the old cat grumbled. “My paws feel



as if they’re burnin’ off.” He lay down on his side, sticking out his paws for Jayfeather to examine.

Jayfeather felt careful y over al four of the elder’s feet. They were cracked—probably from his long journey—and they felt hot and swol en. “This ointment wil help,” he mewed, beginning to smooth it on. “Try to stay off your paws as much as you can. The apprentices wil bring you fresh-kil .”

Purdy let out a long sigh. “That’s much better, young ’un. You may be a scrawny young piece o’

nothin’, but you know what you’re doin’.”

“Thanks a bunch,” Jayfeather muttered. “I’l come every day and—” He broke off as Longtail stretched

out his neck to sniff the young cat’s pelt.

“Jayfeather, that herb…”

“What herb?”

“Sticking to your pelt. I’m not sure, but I think—

Mousefur, come over here,” the blind elder cal ed.

“What?” Mousefur stil sounded grouchy, but she padded back to Jayfeather and sniffed at his fur.

Then he felt her lick off one of the stems he must have picked up when he crawled into the back of the

store. She chewed slowly.

“What are you doing?” Jayfeather asked.



“That’s it!” Mousefur’s voice was shril with

surprise. “Jayfeather, that’s the herb Leafpool mixed in with my tansy!”





CHAPTER 20





Jayfeather wriggled around and sniffed where some

scraps of the herb stil clung to his pelt. The scent was sharp, and as he pushed his nose against the dried leaves, he felt a crinkled edge. He had no idea what the herb was. Leafpool must hardly ever use it; she certainly had never told him about it.

Rapidly he finished spreading yarrow ointment on

Purdy’s pads. “That should be fine,” he meowed. “I’l fetch you some more tomorrow.”

He whirled around and slipped out of the den, ignoring Purdy’s plaintive cry of “What was al that about?”

Racing back to his own den, he found Leafpool curled up in her nest. “Leafpool, what—?” he began,

skidding to a halt beside her. Then he broke off. He remembered how defensive Leafpool had been the

first time he had questioned her about the



mysterious herb. Better keep quiet, and find out what I can by myself.

“Jayfeather, why are you rushing around like that?”

Leafpool mewed; she sounded bone-weary. “I want to have a quick nap before sunset. The Clan is sitting vigil for Honeyfern tonight.”

“Sorry,” Jayfeather mumbled. To his relief,

Leafpool didn’t ask him what he had been about to

say.

“This is the night we should travel to the

Moonpool,” she went on. “You’l have to go by yourself. I can’t leave the vigil.”

Jayfeather nodded. “Okay.” He made himself

sound calm, but he wanted to bounce up and down

like an excited kit. Without Leafpool, surely he could find out something about the mystery herb from the other medicine cats?





A brisk evening breeze rattled the bare branches

as Jayfeather padded through the forest. His earlier excitement had faded; he set his paws down



confidently, but inwardly he was ful of doubt. What would the other medicine cats say about Sol?

When he reached the top of the ridge, he found Barkface and Kestrelpaw waiting for him beside the

stream. Just as he reached them, Littlecloud came bounding up from the direction of ShadowClan.

Jayfeather’s ears pricked with surprise as he picked up another cat’s scent along with him. “Flamepaw!”

he exclaimed.

“You remember me!” Flamepaw was bubbling

over with excitement, like a pool in a rainstorm. “I saw you when Tawnypelt brought me to your camp with Tigerpaw and Dawnpaw. We’re kin,” he added

proudly.

No, we’re not. A pang of regret shook Jayfeather.

He liked the three eager young apprentices.

“Flamepaw is my apprentice now,” Littlecloud

announced. “Tonight I’l introduce him to StarClan.”

“Congratulations,” Jayfeather meowed, touching

the young cat on the shoulder with his tail. He remembered how disappointed Flamepaw had

been when he and his littermates came to the ThunderClan camp, because Sol had convinced

Blackstar that ShadowClan didn’t need a medicine cat. It was great to hear that he was happy now, fol owing the path StarClan had laid out for him. This wasn’t the right time to tel him that they weren’t kin after al .

There won’t ever be a right time, Jayfeather

thought.

By the time the other cats had exchanged

greetings, there was stil no sign of Mothwing and Wil owshine from RiverClan.

“We won’t wait,” Barkface decided. “We’ve a lot to get through tonight.”

“Maybe they’l catch up,” Littlecloud meowed.

And maybe Mothwing doesn’t feel like trekking

all the way to the Moonpool just to catch up on her

sleep, Jayfeather thought. She usually sends

Willowshine, though.

The medicine cats were beginning the last

scramble up the steep slope toward the bushes that

surrounded the Moonpool, when they heard a

breathless yowl from behind them. “Wait! Wait for us!”

Jayfeather turned and caught the scent of

Mothwing and her apprentice, growing rapidly

stronger as the two cats raced to catch up.



“Sorry,” Mothwing panted as they reached the

bottom of the rocks. “We got held up. Petalkit got a thorn in her eye.”

“Poor little thing,” Barkface murmured. “I hope you

got it out.”

“Yes, it just took a good lick,” Mothwing replied. “I left her asleep in the nursery.”

“I don’t know if you’ve tried this,” Littlecloud meowed, “but I’ve always found celandine good for damaged eyes. Just trickle a bit of the juice into her eye to ease the pain.”

“Oh, thank you!” Mothwing exclaimed. “I didn’t know that. I’l try it as soon as we get back.

Wil owshine, do we have any celandine in the store?”

“I think so,” the younger cat replied. “There’s not much left, but it should be enough.”

“Let’s keep going,” Barkface mewed. “We’re

wasting moonlight.”

Jayfeather clawed his way up the rocky hil side and pushed through the bushes to the rim of the hol ow where the Moonpool lay. He could hear the gentle plash of the waterfal , and pictured the surface of the water dappled with the light of countless stars.

“I’ve something to say,” Barkface announced as



“I’ve something to say,” Barkface announced as the cats settled down beside the pool. “Jayfeather, I know our leaders visited your Clan to talk about Sol.”

Jayfeather’s bel y clenched; he braced himself for

what he thought was coming.

“I want to say that it must have been a very hard

decision for Firestar to make,” the old medicine cat went on. “I don’t think any of us should say that it was the right or the wrong thing to do.”

The other medicine cats murmured their

agreement.

Jayfeather’s ears twitched; that was the last thing

he had expected to hear, and he was surprised and

touched by his companions’ sympathy. “It—it’s in the paws of StarClan,” he stammered.

“And it’s time for us to share tongues with

StarClan.” Jayfeather heard Littlecloud rise and pad to the very edge of the water. “But first, I must present Flamepaw to the spirits of his warrior ancestors. Flamepaw, are you ready?”

“Yes.” The word came out as a squeak;

Jayfeather felt Flamepaw’s embarrassment mingled

with his awe.

“Flamepaw,” Littlecloud went on, slipping into the



words of the age-old ritual, “is it your wish to enter into the mysteries of StarClan as a medicine cat?”

“It is.” Now the young cat had control of his voice, though excitement stil vibrated through it.

“Then come forward.”

Flamepaw padded past Jayfeather until he stood

in front of his mentor.

“Warriors of StarClan,” Littlecloud meowed, “I

present to you this apprentice. He has chosen the path of a medicine cat. Grant him your wisdom and

insight so that he may understand your ways and heal his Clan in accordance with your wil .” He paused, then added in a whisper, “Crouch down and

drink from the pool.”

As Flamepaw obeyed, Jayfeather and the rest of

the medicine cats stretched out their necks, too, and lapped a few drops of water from the Moonpool. As

the icy liquid trickled down his throat, Jayfeather curled up and tried to relax. Please, StarClan, he begged, show me something useful. My Clan is

tearing itself apart.

His eyes opened and he found himself on a

narrow forest path, with lush ferns arching over his head on either side. Sunlight warmed his fur and dappled the grass around his paws. But he couldn’t

see any other cats, and when he tasted the air al he could pick up was the scent of green, growing things.

“Where are they al ?” he muttered to himself, beginning to pad forward.

Suddenly he heard a rustling from the undergrowth

ahead of him, and the fern fronds dipped and swayed. Jayfeather sniffed eagerly, but the scent he picked up wasn’t any of the ones he had hoped for.

“Flamepaw!” he exclaimed, as the young

apprentice burst into the open and stood gazing around with wide eyes, his fur fluffed up in a mixture of excitement and fear.

“Jayfeather, it’s you!” he exclaimed. “Where are we? Is this what’s supposed to happen?”

“Calm down,” Jayfeather responded. “Everything’s

fine.”

Mouse dung! he added inwardly. I’m in his

dream! What good will that do?

“I was hoping to meet Tigerstar,” Flamepaw

confessed, gazing up and down the path with bright,

curious eyes. “He’s my kin, and I’ve heard so much

about him!”

“I’m not sure where Tigerstar is,” Jayfeather



replied, careful not to tel the new apprentice about the dark forest. “You should be glad to meet any warriors of StarClan.”

“I know, but…wil they be glad to meet me?”

Flamepaw crouched down, looking very smal and scared. “I don’t know what to say to them!”

Jayfeather touched the apprentice’s shoulder with

the tip of his tail. “When you see them, you’l be fine,”

he promised. “You just have to listen.”

Flamepaw gave him a doubtful look, but he rose

determinedly to his paws and set off down the path.

“See you later, then,” he mewed.

Right now, I’d be happy to see any of the

StarClan warriors, Jayfeather thought. Are they

deliberately hiding from me?

He padded down the path in the opposite

direction from Flamepaw until he reached a clearing

where sweet-smel ing herbs grew around a smal

pool. He remembered finding this place before, when he had spoken with Spottedleaf, but there was

no sign of the tortoiseshel she-cat now.

Bounding over to the pool and looking down into

the water, Jayfeather froze with shock. Though the sun stil shone, the green depths glittered with sun stil shone, the green depths glittered with countless stars.

“What are you doing down there?” he yowled,

clawing at the grass. “Come talk to me!”

The only answer was a thick, stifling pelt of darkness fal ing over him; disoriented, he staggered and found his claws scraping on stone instead of grass. He was awake again, back beside the

Moonpool. The other medicine cats around him were

beginning to rise to their paws.

Stil frustrated and troubled by his dream,

Jayfeather stood up with the other cats and climbed

back up the spiral path. When they had scrambled down the rocky slope to the moorland, he found himself padding next to Littlecloud.

“I think Flamepaw managed very wel for his first time,” the ShadowClan cat meowed. “He met

Nightstar, who was our leader back in the old forest.”

“That’s

good,”

Jayfeather

murmured,

not

mentioning that he had seen the young apprentice in

his dream.

“I think he’l be a great medicine cat,” Littlecloud went on. “He already knows a good number of

herbs.”



Herbs! In his desperation to meet with StarClan, Jayfeather had forgotten about the question he had

meant to ask.

“I came across this herb,” he began, “and I don’t

know what it is.” Please, StarClan, don’t let him wonder why I haven’t asked Leafpool!

“What sort of herb?” Littlecloud queried.

“It has a sharp scent, and the leaves feel crinkly,”

Jayfeather meowed, wishing he could have told the

ShadowClan medicine cat what it looked like; even if he had been able to see it, the shriveled stalk wouldn’t have given him much of a clue to the fresh

herb. “It tastes cold, like frost on fur, and even the dried leaves taste fresh like grass,” he added, remembering what Mousefur had told him.

“Hmm…” Littlecloud padded on thoughtful y for a few heartbeats. “It sounds like parsley to me. Its leaves have a very distinctive shape, like tiny shal ow claws around the edge, and it tastes the same fresh

or dried.”

“And what’s that used for?” Jayfeather struggled to keep the excitement out of his voice.

“Not much,” Littlecloud replied. “But it’s good for stopping milk in nursing queens if their kits die.”



Jayfeather stopped dead.

Or if their kits didn’t die, but were given to a different cat!

His heart was pounding so hard that he thought it

would burst out of his chest. Al the separate scraps of knowledge that he had gathered about his birth suddenly tumbled together into a terrifying pattern.

“Are you okay?” Littlecloud asked anxiously.

“What? Oh—yes, fine.”

Jayfeather forced his paws forward again. His

mind was spinning and fil ing with flashes of light, and he hardly remembered to say good-bye to the other medicine cats when they reached the border of

their territories.

He had always been told that Squirrelflight had no

milk, so Ferncloud and Daisy had nursed him and his littermates. Which meant Squirrelflight wouldn’t have needed to take parsley. So maybe our real mother had to eat it to hide that she’d just given birth!

Jayfeather’s memory carried him back to when he

was a tiny kit, struggling through the snow. He had to remember! Think about the scents, he told himself.

That’s where the answers lie. His sense of smel had That’s where the answers lie. His sense of smel had never before let him down when it was important. It

couldn’t fail him now.

There was a cat close to him, walking slowly through the snow with the scent of milk clinging to her fur.

It

wasn’t

Squirrelflight—it couldn’t

be

Squirrelflight. Suddenly, Jayfeather took a deep breath. He knew exactly which cat’s scent it was.

Everything added up. Which cat could depend on

Squirrelflight’s loyalty, knowing she would carry out the deception for moons and moons, even if it meant

lying to her own mate? Which cat had always poured

out love and concern around him and his littermates?

Which cat could never admit that she had borne kits?

Leafpool! Leafpool is our mother!





CHAPTER 21





Hollyleaf blinked wearily in the misty dawn as the elders and Purdy carried Honeyfern’s body out of the camp. The sun had vanished and the sky was

covered with thick gray clouds. The breeze carried a tang of rain to come. Al the Clan stood silently watching while their Clanmate went to her burial.

When the elders had disappeared through the

thorn tunnel, Brambleclaw began organizing the

day’s patrols. Hol yleaf spotted Sorreltail padding sorrowful y toward the warriors’ den, her head bowed and her tail trailing in the dust. She bounded after her, catching up to her beside the outer branches of the thornbush.

“I’m so sorry,” she meowed. “I’m real y going to miss Honeyfern.”

“We’l al miss her.” Sorreltail’s voice was choked

with grief. “She was so gentle as a kit. And so quick to learn! She knew most of the hunting moves even

before she was apprenticed.”

“She was always lots of fun to play with,” Hol yleaf told her, touching her nose to Sorreltail’s shoulder.

Sorreltail blinked. “She enjoyed being with you and your brothers. And she was always so worried that you wouldn’t get enough milk, because

Squirrelflight couldn’t feed you.”

Hol yleaf began to bristle at the mention of the cat she had believed was her mother, and tried hard to

make her fur lie flat again. She wouldn’t think about that betrayal when it was more important to comfort

Sorreltail.

“It wasn’t Squirrelflight’s fault,” the tortoiseshel queen went on, obviously misunderstanding what

was bothering Hol yleaf. “And you were wel looked after. Ferncloud and Daisy fed you, and I don’t think Leafpool was ever out of the nursery, bringing them

borage to make their milk come, and al the

strengthening herbs she could find!”

“Leafpool did al that?” Hol yleaf asked.



“Oh, yes, she was always fussing over you! Maybe

because you were her sister’s kits, or maybe

because she was with you when you first came to the

hol ow.”

“I didn’t know that.” Hol yleaf felt a prickling in her fur. If Leafpool was with us, she must know who our

real mother is!

Sorreltail nodded, then arched her back in a long

stretch. “I’m going to see if I can get some sleep,”

she murmured. “Maybe Honeyfern wil walk in my dreams.”

As soon as Sorreltail had disappeared into the warriors’ den, Hol yleaf looked around for the medicine cat. She had vowed never to ask

Squirrelflight anything more about her real parents; she didn’t want to speak to the cat who had lied to

her ever again. But maybe Leafpool would tel her.

She spotted Leafpool talking to Firestar near the

entrance to the thorn tunnel, and padded across to them, hovering a couple of tail-lengths away as she

waited for a chance to get the medicine cat alone.

“You’ve been keeping vigil al night,” Firestar was

meowing. “You’re exhausted. Why don’t you go out into the forest and get some air? Stretch your legs and maybe find a quiet spot to have a sleep, without any cat to interrupt you.”

“I shouldn’t leave the Clan…,” Leafpool protested.

“Jayfeather’s back from the Moonpool,” Firestar pointed out. “We can do without you for a little while.”

He

stretched

forward

and

touched

noses

affectionately with Leafpool. “I could make that an order.”

Leafpool yawned. “Al right, Firestar, but I’l be back before sunhigh.”

“Take as long as you want.” Firestar dipped his head and padded away.

Hol yleaf waited until Leafpool had gone out

through the thorn tunnel, then fol owed her into the forest. The medicine cat was out of sight, but Hol yleaf tracked her by her scent until she joined her at the top of a treeless rise overlooking the lake.

Leafpool was sitting with her tail wrapped around her paws, gazing out across the water.

She sprang to her paws as Hol yleaf bounded up

beside her. “Hol yleaf! Were you looking for me?”

“Yes, I—I wanted to ask you something.” Now that

the moment had come, Hol yleaf didn’t feel so sure about what she was about to do. The answer would



about what she was about to do. The answer would

change her life forever. Was that what she wanted? I have to know the truth!

Leafpool’s eyes were wary as she mewed, “Go

on, then.”

She knows we’ve found out about the lie! Hol yleaf

guessed, her bel y lurching. Squirrelflight must have told her what happened that day on the cliff.

“Wel ?” Leafpool prompted.

Hol yleaf took a deep breath. “Tel me what you know. Al of it. I have to know the truth!”

Leafpool’s amber eyes brimmed with sorrow. She

took a pace toward Hol yleaf, sweeping her tail around as if to lay it on the younger cat’s shoulder, but left the gesture unfinished.

“You don’t have to worry,” Leafpool meowed. “I wil

never tel any cat. But please tel me why you did it.”

Hol yleaf felt as if a massive piece of fresh-kil were stuck in her throat. This wasn’t how she had intended their talk to go. “Did what?” she managed

to choke out.

Leafpool let out a long sigh, closing her eyes as if she had to nerve herself for what she was about to

say. Then she faced Hol yleaf again.



“Why did you kil Ashfur?”

No! Hol yleaf dug her claws hard into the ground.

That wasn’t what she had asked! Leafpool couldn’t

know! She opened her jaws to reply, but the words of denial wouldn’t come.

“I know, Hol yleaf,” Leafpool mewed gently. “When

I was preparing Ashfur’s body for his vigil, I found a tuft of your fur caught in his claws. But I hid it away where no cat would find it. I think I wanted to hide it from myself.” She paused, swal owed, and repeated,

“Why?”

“He had to die!” Fury made Hol yleaf hiss through

gritted teeth. “You know why!”

“No, I don’t.”

Leafpool’s eyes were genuinely mystified, and

Hol yleaf realized that Squirrelflight had never told her about revealing the terrible secret to Ashfur.

“He had to die because he knew!” Hol yleaf

snarled. “That night, on the cliff in the storm, Squirrelflight told him that we weren’t her kits. He was going to tel al the Clans, at the Gathering, and I couldn’t let him do that! They think we’re true Clan cats, forestborn like they are. I couldn’t let them find out the truth—that Firestar’s Clan was even less pure than they thought. Ashfur would have destroyed ThunderClan.”

As she spoke, Leafpool’s eyes had grown wider

with dismay. “Oh, StarClan, no!” she whispered.

“This is al my fault….”

Hol yleaf’s mind was whirling. She couldn’t think beyond this moment; she only knew that the cat who

held the truth in her paws was standing in front of her.

“Squirrelflight told you about us, didn’t she? You were there when we first came to the hol ow. You must know who our real mother is.”

Leafpool faced her calmly now. “Yes, I know.”

“Then you have to tel me—please!”

For several heartbeats, Leafpool didn’t reply. She

stood blinking, her muscles tensed as if she were about to leap over a vast chasm. Then she spoke.

“I am your mother, Hol yleaf. Squirrelflight was trying to protect me.”

For a moment that lasted a heartbeat or a maybe

a moon, Hol yleaf stared at her. No, it can’t be! But she knew that Leafpool had spoken the truth.

Whipping around, she bounded away, her paws

slipping on the dead leaves so that she slid to the bottom of the rise in a tangle of legs and tail.



Scrambling to her paws, she pelted toward the deepest places of the forest, as far from the hol ow as she could get. She didn’t know where she was going, only that she wanted to outrun the lies, and the taste of Ashfur’s blood in her mouth.

It was all for nothing! I did it to save us all, but it was no use! Everything has been ruined….





CHAPTER 22





Jayfeather struggled through snow that reached up

to his bel y fur. Frozen lumps of it stuck between his pads, making every step painful. Just ahead of him

was another cat; he recognized her tabby-and-white

pelt, and wailed for her to come back and help him,

but she never turned her head. Then the snowy ground gave way beneath his paws, and he was fal ing, fal ing….

He woke in his own nest, the bedding tossed

about by his thrashing limbs. Sitting up, heart stil racing from his dream, he heard Leafpool scrabbling

about in the depths of the store. A throbbing tide of anguish came from her, so strong that for a

heartbeat he thought she was shrieking aloud.

Jayfeather sprang to his paws and padded over to the cave entrance. A flame of desperation burned

inside him, to ask the medicine cat if she real y was his mother, but he couldn’t ignore such deep

distress. “Leafpool?” he meowed. “What’s the

matter?”

Leafpool backed out of the store. “I…I told

Hol yleaf something I shouldn’t have,” she confessed.

Jayfeather understood at once; now al the secrets

were gushing out like water breaking through a dam.

He raised his chin in a chal enge. “You told her that you’re our mother, didn’t you?”

He heard Leafpool’s gasp of shock. “How long

have you known?”

“I didn’t know, until just now. But I’ve been putting things together, and last night everything fel into place. Squirrelflight’s loyalty to the cat who gave birth to us. The vague memories I have of that journey through the snow. The way you behave toward the three of us. And the fact that Mousefur remembers parsley accidental y mixed with her tansy about that time. Parsley is used to stop the milk in nursing mothers. You would have needed to take it to stop your own milk.”

There was a long silence after he had finished speaking, in which Jayfeather almost thought he could hear his own heart beating.

“If you know so much,” Leafpool mewed at last,

“then do you know what happens next?”

“No.” Jayfeather felt a strong sensation that there

was something else Leafpool wanted to say to him,

but she kept silent. He thought about entering her mind to find out what it was, but he didn’t quite dare.

He didn’t like the idea of what he might discover.

“You have to help your littermates,” Leafpool told him, her voice sharp and urgent. “You must learn to live with this, for the sake of the Clan.”

You’ve got no right to tell us what we must do. But

Jayfeather did not speak the thought aloud. Part of what the medicine cat said was true. Sooner or later, they al had to find a way forward.



“Please,” Leafpool mewed, and there was a note

of desperation in her voice. “Find Lionblaze and Hol yleaf, before anything else happens.”

Is there anything else that could go wrong?

Jayfeather wondered. But he nodded and backed

out of the den. Leafpool was scared for her kits—al

three of them—just as she had always been when trouble came to the Clan.

He scanned the clearing until he located

Lionblaze approaching the fresh-kil pile with a mouthful of prey. Jayfeather bounded over to him.

“Leave that and come with me,” he meowed, jerking

his head. “We have to talk.”

Jayfeather could feel Lionblaze’s confusion, but his brother didn’t protest, just dropped his prey on the pile and padded beside him toward the camp entrance.

“Where’s Hol yleaf?” Jayfeather asked. The sense

of approaching disaster loomed even closer as he realized that this new knowledge would hurt her hardest of al . The warrior code means so much to

her!

“I’ve no idea,” Lionblaze replied. “I think she left camp, but I haven’t seen her since the end of the camp, but I haven’t seen her since the end of the vigil.”

“We have to find her,” Jayfeather mewed as they

emerged from the tunnel into the forest. “She…she’s

found out something that could upset her.”

“What?”

“I’l tel you when we find Hol yleaf.” Jayfeather lifted his head to taste the air, searching for a trace of their sister’s scent.

“Tel me now,” Lionblaze insisted. “Haven’t there been enough secrets? Even the three of us hardly seem to talk anymore.”

Jayfeather turned to face him. “Leafpool is our mother.”

He sensed shock like a bolt of lightning flashing through his brother. “I don’t believe it!” Lionblaze gasped. “She’s a medicine cat. It’s impossible!”

“You’d better start believing it,” Jayfeather mewed

bleakly. “She told me so herself. And we have to decide what we’re going to do about it.”





After a long search through the forest, trying to fol ow confusing traces of their sister’s scent, they discovered Hol yleaf at the top of the mossy bank that sloped down toward the lake. Jayfeather sensed

her tension as soon as he bounded up to her.

“Hol yleaf, we need to talk,” he meowed.

“There’s nothing to discuss.” Hol yleaf’s voice was

distant. Jayfeather could tel that she hadn’t turned to face him and Lionblaze. Instead she was gazing across the water as if the answers were hidden among the waves. “We have to find out who our real

father is. And that wil be the end of al the secrets.”

“What do you mean?” Lionblaze asked, padding

up to join them. “No cat knows yet who kil ed Ashfur, not unless Sol confesses. That’s one secret that the Clan won’t let rest.”

“Too bad.” Hol yleaf’s voice was dismissive,

though Jayfeather detected a new surge of tension within her. “There are more important secrets than that. We must know who our father is.”

“You’re right,” Jayfeather agreed, curiosity

prickling in every hair on his pelt. “But it’s not going to be that easy figuring it out on our own. Did you ask Leafpool?”

“No, and I don’t think she would tel us if we did.”

Jayfeather realized she was right. He couldn’t imagine that Leafpool would want to tel the truth about their father now, when she had kept the secret for so many moons. Once the rest of the Clan found

out what she had done—and they would find out, because Jayfeather couldn’t see how the secret could be contained any longer—her life would be ruined. She wouldn’t want that to happen to another

cat as wel .

“Wait a moment,” Lionblaze meowed. “Do we

real y want to do this?”

“What do you mean, mouse-brain?” Hol yleaf

hissed. “Are you going to live the rest of your life never knowing who fathered you?” Jayfeather heard

her claws tearing at the moss. “Because I’m not!”

“Just think about what you’re saying.” Lionblaze sat down beside Jayfeather. “We never wanted the secret to come out, and now that Ashfur’s dead it doesn’t have to. Leafpool won’t tel any cat the truth.”

“I want to know!” Hol yleaf’s tail lashed through the dead leaves that covered the ground.



dead leaves that covered the ground.

“But why?” Lionblaze argued. “If we keep quiet, everything wil go back to how it was before.”

If you believe that, you’ll believe anything,

Jayfeather thought, but he said nothing.

“Haven’t you realized what this means?” Lionblaze

went on, his voice growing excited. “Leafpool’s our mother, and Firestar is her father. We’re stil part of the prophecy!”





CHAPTER 23





Lionblaze slid out of the camp through the dirtplace tunnel and skirted the rim of the hol ow until he came to the place where he and his littermates had nearly been burned alive on the night of the storm. The grass was stil blackened, and debris from charred branches

was

scattered

around.

Lionblaze

shuddered as he remembered the leaping flames

and the mad glare in Ashfur’s eyes.

Above his head the moon floated in the indigo sky, waxing toward ful and surrounded by the frosty glitter of stars. No clouds blurred their light. Does that mean you approve of what I’m doing,

StarClan? Lionblaze silently addressed his warrior ancestors. He had made this plan as soon as he realized that he and his littermates were stil part of the prophecy, but it had taken him another day to decide to put it into action. Whatever you think, I have to do this.

Looking down into the hol ow, he could see the thornbush where Sol was a prisoner, and Birchfal , crouched on watch just beyond the outer branches.

The thick, criss-crossing growth of the thorn hid Sol from Lionblaze’s sight, but Sol’s scent drifted up to him as he tasted the air.

“Right,” Lionblaze whispered. “Let’s go!”

Paw step by paw step, he crept down the cliff face, testing each foothold before he dared put his weight on it. He wasn’t just afraid of fal ing; if he dislodged a stone, or slipped and had to scrabble to save himself, he would alert Birchfal . He froze once as he brushed against a straggling bush growing from a crack, and once when a shower of grit spurted up from under his paws and pattered down

into the camp. But Birchfal didn’t move.

Snoozing on watch? Lionblaze wondered.

Moons seemed to have passed before he leaped

down the last fox-length to land lightly on the ground beside the bush. His legs trembled. With a swift glance toward the slumbering shape of Birchfal , he

crawled underneath the branches of the thornbush.

In the dim light that filtered through the twigs, he saw Sol curled up in a mossy nest, his tail wrapped

over his nose and his sides heaving with the rhythmic breathing of sleep. Lionblaze crept over to him and prodded his shoulder. Sol’s eyes flew open,

and for a heartbeat Lionblaze thought he saw

surprise flicker in their amber depths. His jaws opened, but Lionblaze slapped his tail over the loner’s muzzle before he could utter a sound.

“Quiet!”

Sol nodded, and Lionblaze took his tail away.



“I’m sorry, Lionblaze. For a moment I thought you

were that snake.” Sol was composed once more, his

hushed voice barely reaching Lionblaze’s ears.

“What can I do for you?”

“I…I need to talk to you.” Now that Lionblaze had

succeeded in coming face-to-face with his Clan’s prisoner, it was harder than he had expected to say

what he had to say. “I’ve found out that my mother isn’t who I thought she was, and I need to figure out if it affects the prophecy.”

“Good,” Sol mewed softly. He sat up and began to

groom moss out of his fur. “You can start by helping me get out of here.”

“I—I can’t do that!” Lionblaze only just

remembered to keep his voice down.

“Of course you can. You must have climbed down

the cliff to get here without Birchfal seeing you. You can show me the way to get back up. I didn’t kil Ashfur. You know I didn’t.”

“As far as ThunderClan is concerned, you’re the only cat it could have been,” Lionblaze retorted. He wasn’t sure what he thought himself. He couldn’t forget how Sol had promised to help him fulfil the prophecy—and how much he needed that help now



prophecy—and how much he needed that help now

—but he also shrank from betraying his Clan by letting the loner escape.

“Why should I help you if you won’t help me?” Sol

gave Lionblaze a long look from glowing amber eyes, then calmly licked one paw and started to wash his face.

Lionblaze stared at him in frustration. I can’t make him talk, but I can’t show him the way out, either!

“Okay,” he muttered. “I’m leaving. I can’t help you

escape, it would cause too much trouble.”

“For you?” Sol queried.

“For my Clan,” Lionblaze hissed. It was too easy

to imagine what the other Clan leaders would think when they heard Sol was on the loose. They’d blame

ThunderClan, that was for sure. He flattened himself to the ground so he could wriggle out under the thorn branches.

“Wait! Don’t you want to know who your father is?”

Lionblaze stopped and looked back over his

shoulder. “You know that?”

“Of course.” Sol passed his paw over one ear.

“So who is he?” Lionblaze asked, his bel y

churning.



Sol’s eyes glinted with amusement. “Nothing for nothing, Lionblaze. I’l tel you the truth when you get me out of here.”

“And how do I know I can trust you?” The words came out louder than Lionblaze had intended; he froze as a scuffling sound came from outside the den.

“Sol?” Birchfal cal ed. “Are you okay?”

Sol paused, his whiskers twitching. Ants crawled

through Lionblaze’s pelt and he held his breath as he waited to be discovered. Firestar will strip my pelt off and throw it out for the crows!

“Sol?” Birchfal ’s voice came again, sounding

more anxious.

“I’m fine, Birchfal ,” the loner replied. “Just talking to myself.”

“Okay, good night.”

Lionblaze relaxed as he heard Birchfal settling down again, though his pelt stil felt hot with tension.

“How do you know you can trust me?” Sol went on.

He sounded amused. “You don’t. But knowledge is power, Lionblaze, and right now I have more

knowledge than any of the Clan cats.”

“Al right,” Lionblaze mewed slowly. “I’l show you how to get out. But you must promise to tel me about my father…and advise me about the prophecy.”

Sol dipped his head. “You have my word.”

Whatever that’s worth…“Okay, fol ow me,”

Lionblaze whispered. “Put your paws where I put mine. It’s a tricky climb, and it’l be ten times harder because we mustn’t be spotted.”

He pushed his way out through the thorns with Sol

hard on his paws and began to haul himself up. The

cliff seemed to stretch above his head forever, and

Lionblaze couldn’t believe that no cat would see them splayed out against the rock in the bright moonlight. But no accusing yowls came from the clearing, and at last he pul ed himself up to the cliff top and turned to wait for Sol to join him.

The loner huffed out a breath as he hauled himself

over the rim of the hol ow, then gestured with his tail for Lionblaze to fol ow him away from the edge. He

halted a few fox-lengths away.

“Wel ?” Lionblaze demanded. “You’re free. What

about your part of the bargain?”

“Not here,” Sol replied. “It’s too dangerous.

Besides, if you stay away too long, some cat might

notice you’re missing. You should get back to the warriors’ den.”

“But you promised!”

“And I’l keep that promise.” Sol flicked his ears in the direction of ShadowClan territory. “I’l go to that old Twoleg nest beyond the ShadowClan border,

and wait for you there. Come with your littermates as soon as you can.”

“Okay.” Lionblaze’s bel y churned with frustration.

“But you’d better be there.”

Sol flicked his tail dismissively. “I wil be.” Turning, he bounded off toward the ShadowClan border.

Lionblaze watched him until the undergrowth hid his blotched pelt from sight. Then he slipped down to the thorn barrier and back into the camp the same way he had left it. He hoped no cat would ask why it had taken him so long to make his dirt.

I did the right thing, he argued with himself.

Hollyleaf said we have to find out who our father is.

And even more important, Sol is the only cat who

can help us fulfill the prophecy!





“Firestar! Firestar!” Birchfal ’s yowl dragged

Lionblaze from a deep sleep. Al around him in the warriors’ den, his Clanmates were rousing.

“Is there an attack?” Brightheart’s fur bristled.

“Birchfal sounds terrified!” She scrambled out of her nest and pushed her way out into the open, with Cloudtail just behind her.

“Firestar!” Birchfal ’s screech sounded right

outside the den.

“What’s got into him?” Dustpelt grumbled, rising to

his paws and shaking moss out of his fur. “Can’t a cat get a decent night’s sleep around here?”

More warriors were shouldering their way out,

loudly demanding what was going on. Lionblaze



knew exactly what was bothering Birchfal , but he realized he had to seem just as concerned as every

cat. He sprang up and slid out through the branches

into the gray dawn light. Shadows stil lay deep around the edges of the clearing, and the ground was dusted with frost.

Firestar was bounding down the tumbled rocks.

Birchfal raced across the clearing to meet him at the bottom.

“Firestar!” the young warrior gasped. “Sol has escaped!”

Firestar’s ears flicked up. With Birchfal panting behind him, he raced over to the thornbush and thrust his head inside. More of the ThunderClan cats fol owed him, and Lionblaze crowded up with them,

making sure that he left his fresh scent at the bottom of the cliff where he and Sol had begun their climb.

“He’s real y gone?” Brambleclaw asked, rushing

up to join his leader as Firestar backed away from the bush.

Firestar nodded.

“Hey, there are marks on the cliff!” Hazeltail stretched up with her paws to point at a spot where a couple of pebbles had been dislodged. “Sol must have escaped this way.”

“Good riddance, if you ask me,” Cloudtail

growled, giving a single lash of his tail. “It’s not like we could have kept him here forever.”

There was a murmur of agreement; Lionblaze saw

relief in the eyes of more than one cat.

“You’re not going to track him down, are you, Firestar?” Sandstorm asked. “He’s caused us

enough trouble, and we could never have punished him enough for kil ing Ashfur.”

“He’s obviously guilty,” Spiderleg put in. “He wouldn’t have risked his neck climbing the cliff to escape, otherwise.”

“That’s true,” Thornclaw meowed as Firestar

looked thoughtful. “He must have been scared of what we would do to him. We sure taught him a lesson!”

Firestar took a couple of paces away from Sol’s

den and gazed at the cats who stood around him.

“You’re right,” he murmured at last. “Let’s hope that Sol has learned the Clans can’t be messed around

with, and doesn’t try to cross any more borders.

Brambleclaw, we’l double the patrols for now, until we’re sure he’s not stil in the territory.”



“Sure, Firestar,” the deputy meowed with a brisk nod.

“What wil you tel the other Clans?” Graystripe asked, a worried look in his amber eyes. “If we say

he escaped, they’l think we were too weak to hold on to him. And they might blame us for letting him out to cause more trouble.”

Firestar twitched his ears. “I’l tel him we banished him from our territories and made him promise never

to set paw here again.”

“But that’s not true.” Sandstorm looked uneasy.

“Should we real y be lying to the other Clans?”

“Like they always tel us the truth!” Cloudtail snapped.

“I think Sandstorm’s right,” Brightheart put in, with a sharp glance at her mate. “What if Sol is stil around? What would the other Clans think of us then?”

Firestar hesitated, his gaze fixed on his paws, then raised his head again. “We’l do as I said. It’s for the sake of ThunderClan,” he meowed. “We need

to show that we’re strong and committed to the warrior code, and that we deal with our own Clan’s

affairs in our own way. And we’l make sure that Sol affairs in our own way. And we’l make sure that Sol isn’t stil hanging about,” he finished.





As the cats began to move away, and

Brambleclaw began to organize the patrols,

Lionblaze spotted Hol yleaf standing at the edge of the clearing. Her eyes were like green flames, but it was impossible to tel what she was looking at.

Slipping between Sandstorm and Hazeltail, he

padded to her side. “I have to tel you something,” he mewed softly.

Hol yleaf didn’t seem to hear him. “He escaped!”



she hissed, her claws flexing in and out.

Lionblaze couldn’t tel if she sounded glad or sorry. He didn’t dare tel her what had real y happened with so many of his Clanmates close by.

“Where’s Jayfeather?” he asked.

Hol yleaf’s ears flicked. “How should I know?”

“I’l find him,” Lionblaze meowed. “Go into the forest and meet us by the training clearing. Don’t argue!” he added as Hol yleaf opened her jaws. “Just do it. It’s important.”

His sister rol ed her eyes, but she set off toward the camp entrance, staying in the shadows. Once he

was sure she was on her way, Lionblaze headed for

the medicine cats’ den, but before he reached it, Jayfeather emerged from the nursery. Lionblaze

bounded over to him.

“What’s al the yowling about?” Jayfeather

demanded.

“Sol has escaped.”

“Has he?” Jayfeather’s eyes stretched wide with surprise. Then the young medicine cat sniffed. “How

convenient.”

“We have to talk,” Lionblaze muttered, glancing back to where his Clanmates were splitting up into patrols. “Come with me into the forest. We’re meeting Hol yleaf beside the training clearing.”

To his relief, Jayfeather didn’t argue. “I’l tel Leafpool I’m going to look for yarrow. We’re running short, and Purdy’s pads are stil giving him trouble.”

He trotted off toward his den.

Lionblaze didn’t wait for him; it was best if al three of them left the camp separately. Hating the need for deception, he tagged on to the end of a patrol that was just leaving, with Sandstorm at its head. Once out in the forest he dropped back; in case any cat had spotted him he pretended to have picked up a

thorn in his pad. As soon as the patrol had vanished, he raced for the training clearing.

Hol yleaf was crouched in the hol ow under a tree

root.

“Wel ?”

she

demanded

as

Lionblaze

approached.

“Let’s wait for Jayfeather.”

Not many heartbeats had passed before

Lionblaze heard a rustling in the undergrowth and picked up his brother’s scent. Jayfeather shouldered his way out of the long grass and joined them.

“Now wil you tel us what al this is about?”

Hol yleaf meowed.



As briefly as he could, Lionblaze told them how he

had managed to get into Sol’s den to talk with him,

and how he had shown him the way up the cliff. “He’s gone to hide in the old Twoleg nest where he stayed

before,” he finished. “We have to go there so he can tel us who our father is—”

“Have you got bees in your brain?” Hol yleaf

growled with a lash of her tail. “You let a ThunderClan prisoner escape? That’s completely against the

warrior code! What do you think Firestar wil do if he ever finds out?”

“There’s no reason why he should find out,”

Lionblaze replied steadily. “I thought you were the one who wanted to find out the truth about our father!

Now we can. Are you coming with me or not?”

Jayfeather was looking uneasy, but he nodded.

“We’l come.” He nudged Hol yleaf. “There’s no sense in complaining about it. You know we’ve got no choice. We can’t live with only half the truth, and this looks like our only chance of finding out.”





The sun had risen above the treetops by the time

they reached the end of ShadowClan territory and struck out into the unknown forest. It was so long since they had been there that Lionblaze wasn’t sure of the way, but Sol’s scent trail led them onward.

It looks as if he headed straight for the Twoleg nest. So maybe he does mean to keep his part of

the deal.

Eventual y the crumbling wal s of the old Twoleg nest came into sight, hardly visible among tal clumps of seeding wil ow-herb, bracken, and thistles.

Sol’s scent was strong and fresh. Lionblaze led the

way up to the entrance and peered inside. Weeds sprouted through cracks in the stone floor, and cobwebs stretched across the corners.

“Sol?” he cal ed. “Are you there?”

“Greetings.” The voice came from above

Lionblaze’s head. He looked up to see Sol sitting on top of one of the wal s, half-hidden by the branches of a hol y bush stretching in from outside.

The loner rose to his paws and jumped down

beside Lionblaze and his littermates. “Greetings,” he repeated. “I see you came—”

“We came to find out the truth!” Hol yleaf

shouldered her way past Lionblaze. “Tel us what you know.”

Sol blinked. “It won’t help you, you know. As long

as you’re part of the prophecy, why does it matter who your father is?”

“It matters,” Hol yleaf growled.

“Wait.” Lionblaze stepped forward to stand

alongside his sister. “I agree with Sol. I’d like to know the truth about my father, but it’s the prophecy that’s important.”

“But we need to know,” Jayfeather argued. “One name, that’s al we want.”

A gleam of cold amusement lit in Sol’s eyes.

Lionblaze knew he was enjoying the power he held



over them. Suddenly he wasn’t sure that Sol knew anything about their father. Perhaps he was just taunting them, knowing they couldn’t take him back to the Clan. But he had known who they were from the start, and had offered to help….

“This is our chance to fulfil the prophecy,”

Lionblaze mewed desperately, turning to his

littermates. “Sol knows so much…he even knew

when the sun was going to vanish!”

Neither of his littermates responded. Jayfeather just looked stubborn, while Hol yleaf had tensed her muscles as if she was about to pounce on Sol and

force him to tel the truth.

No! If she lays a claw on him he’ll never tell us!

Sol’s amber gaze traveled slowly over Hol yleaf; her bristling hostility didn’t ruffle a single hair on his pelt. “Think about what I can offer you,” he meowed

softly. “So much more than merely knowing your ancestors! Real power takes much more than that.

Listen to me, and I’l teach you how to truly hold the power of the stars in your paws.”

Hol yleaf let out a furious hiss and crouched to spring.

“No!” Lionblaze yowled. He leaped on his sister, gripped her by the scruff and dragged her outside, ignoring her flailing paws and her screeches of outrage. “Are you mouse-brained?” he demanded,

releasing her among the dead bracken outside. “If you make Sol angry, he’l never help us.”

“Why do we need him?” Jayfeather padded out to

join them; his voice was calm, his head tilted on one side. “The prophecy doesn’t say anything about needing help. How can Sol be more powerful than we are?”

“We don’t have the power of the stars yet, do we?”

Lionblaze’s bel y churned as he tried to make his littermates understand. “Let him teach us what he knows. What harm can it do? And then he’l tel us who our father is.”

Frustrated, he realized that there had been no point in coming to the Twoleg nest. Neither Hol yleaf nor Jayfeather was prepared to talk sensibly with Sol. They probably believed he kil ed Ashfur, like the rest of the Clan. They might as wel go straight back to the hol ow.

He looked back at the entrance to the nest to see

Sol standing there; his glowing amber gaze swept across them. “You are not ready to listen to me yet,”



across them. “You are not ready to listen to me yet,”

he mewed. “When you are, come again. I’l be here,

waiting for you.”





CHAPTER 24





Hollyleaf’s pelt prickled with frustration as she and her brothers headed back toward their own territory.

They had been so close to discovering who their father was! But Sol had enjoyed holding his

knowledge out of their reach, like a juicy bit of prey that he meant to keep for himself.

I could have made him tell us, if Lionblaze hadn’t

interfered!

She was so angry that she was hardly aware of her surroundings; suddenly Jayfeather nudged her hard in the side, nearly knocking her off her paws.

“What—?” she began.

Lionblaze slapped his tail over her mouth.

“ShadowClan!” he hissed. “Hide!”

Al three cats dived for cover into a bramble thicket. Hol yleaf spat in annoyance as a thorn pierced one of her pads, and she tried to lick it out as ShadowClan scent wreathed around her.

“Ivytail, Smokefoot, and Owlpaw,” Lionblaze

reported, peering out through the bramble tendrils.

“They’re patroling the border. I hope they didn’t scent us.”

No chal enging yowls came from the patrol, and the scents gradual y died away, leaving only the smel of the border markers.

“I guess it’s safe to come out now,” Lionblaze mewed after a few heartbeats. “Let’s get back into our own territory as quickly as we can.”

He took the lead, racing over the rough grass, weaving his way around hazel thickets and clumps of

fern, until they flashed past their own border markers and drew to a panting halt several fox-lengths into ThunderClan territory.

“We’d better hunt on our way back,” he told them.



“That way we can pretend we went out to restock the

fresh-kil pile.”

Jayfeather nodded. “And I’l look for yarrow. If I come back empty-pawed, Leafpool wil want to know

why.”

Though she did as Lionblaze suggested, padding

softly through the undergrowth with her ears pricked and her jaws gaping for the first scent of prey, Hol yleaf’s pelt crawled with resentment. We

shouldn’t have to lie and deceive like this! Why can’t we be proud of what we can do?

While stalking a squirrel, she thought about how she could make Sol tel them the name of their fa the r. I’d do anything. Anything! she thought fiercely. She remembered how easily her jaws had met in Ashfur’s throat….

No, don’t think of that! Ashfur had to die because

he would have ruined everything. He’s not

important now. We’re the ones who matter!

Hol yleaf’s claws tore at the mossy ground under her paws; alerted, the squirrel started up and shot to safety in the nearest tree.

“Mouse dung!” Hol yleaf spat.

“What’s the matter with you?” Lionblaze asked, padding up with a blackbird in his jaws. “Do you expect the prey to come and throw itself onto your claws?”

Hol yleaf shrugged and turned away. When our

father learns who we are, he’ll be so proud of us!

Maybe he doesn’t even know about us! Maybe he’s

always wanted kits, and now he has three warriors to be his kin for the rest of his life.

Closer to the camp, she managed to catch a

mouse, though she had to admit to herself that it looked ready to die of old age and hadn’t even tried to run. Prey was scarce, and by the time they reached the stone hol ow she and Lionblaze hadn’t caught anything else, but Jayfeather had found a clump of yarrow and now padded along with a bunch

of the herb in his jaws.

When Hol yleaf pushed her way into the clearing,

fol owed by her littermates, she spotted Spiderleg, Birchfal , and Hazeltail clustered together near the fresh-kil pile.

“I don’t think Sol’s gone,” she heard Birchfal meow as she padded across with her prey. “He’s lurking about somewhere.”

Hazeltail shivered. “I hope not. I knew al along we Hazeltail shivered. “I hope not. I knew al along we should never have brought him back.”

Spiderleg shrugged. “He can’t do any more harm.

Let him go where he likes.”

“And kil more cats?” Hazeltail’s neck fur rose.

“That’s mouse-brained!”

“If he’s here, our patrols wil find him,” Birchfal reassured her, touching her shoulder with his tail.

“And Firestar—”

He was interrupted by a cal from Dustpelt, who came bounding over from the barrier around the snake’s hole. “I’m alerting every cat,” the brown tabby warrior meowed. “That mouse with the

deathberries hasn’t been touched. The snake must be stil around.” He dashed off to warn Brambleclaw

and his patrol, who had just appeared through the tunnel.

A sense of power thril ed through Hol yleaf from ears to tail-tip. ThunderClan had never felt so alive!

Every cat was working together to face the threats that surrounded them. There was nothing they

couldn’t do! And I could do anything too, if I could lead them!

“Hol yleaf.” The black she-cat started as Leafpool



spoke behind her; dropping her prey on the fresh-kil pile, she spun around to see the medicine cat with Squirrelflight at her side.

“We need to talk,” Squirrelflight mewed.

Hol yleaf stared at Leafpool, her heart suddenly thundering in her chest. Is she going to tell the others what I did?

Then Leafpool gave a tiny shake of her head, and

Hol yleaf relaxed.

“What do you want to say to us?” Lionblaze

asked; he had come up to deposit his prey in time to hear what Squirrelflight had said.

“Yes, what have we got to talk about?” Jayfeather

added, his chal enging tone muffled by his mouthful of yarrow stems.

“Not here,” Leafpool murmured with a glance at the cats close by. “Come with us into the forest.”

Hol yleaf hesitated, exchanging a glance with

Lionblaze. He seemed to be waiting for her to decide. Then she nodded. “Okay. We’l talk to you.”

When Jayfeather had deposited the yarrow in the

medicine cats’ den, Squirrelflight led the way into the forest as far as a huge oak tree with moss-covered

roots.



“Wel ?” Jayfeather demanded, an edge to his

tone. “What’s this al about?”

Squirrelflight and Leafpool gave the three

littermates a long look. Hol yleaf realized that although they were such different cats, the

expression in their eyes was the same. She didn’t want to recognize it; she didn’t want to admit that it was love.

Final y Squirrelflight took a deep breath. “Leafpool is your mother,” she began, “but I want to say that I couldn’t have loved you more if I had given birth to you myself. We raised you together, and surely that’s what matters.”

“You raised us to believe in a lie!” Hol yleaf hissed, not giving her brothers a chance to respond.

“We have nothing to say to either of you.” Ignoring the shocked looks on Lionblaze’s and Jayfeather’s faces, she added, “Come on. There are no mothers

here. A mother would love her kits enough to tel them the truth.”

She stood for a moment longer, savoring the

anguish her rejection had cal ed up in the two she-cats, then whipped around and began stalking back

to the camp.



“Hol yleaf, wait!” Lionblaze cal ed.

Hol yleaf glanced over her shoulder; fury surged through her and she bared her teeth in a snarl.

“Come on!”

Lionblaze bounded after her, fol owed a heartbeat

later by Jayfeather. “This is mouse-brained,” he protested. “We could at least talk. They might be prepared to tel us things we need to know.”

“Like the name of our father?” Hol yleaf snapped,

not breaking stride. “No, there’s no point in asking them. We’d only get more lies.” She lashed her tail, trying hard to dismiss Squirrelflight and Leafpool from her mind. “Sol wil tel us,” she declared.





“Bring the moss over here,” Hol yleaf directed.

“Whitewing’s kits wil come soon, and she needs a real y comfortable nest.” Since the disastrous

meeting with Sol the day before, she had struggled

to put her sense of betrayal out of her mind and concentrate on her Clan duties, but she couldn’t manage it. How could she make herself a good warrior when she knew she should never have been

born at al ? Every cat knew that medicine cats weren’t al owed to have kits. She and her littermates were nothing more than a mistake. One that

Leafpool had been too ashamed to own up to.

Maybe their real father would feel differently….

The nursery seemed ful of queens and wriggling



kits as Foxpaw and Icepaw staggered through the entrance with huge bal s of moss. Whitewing was curled up nearby.

“Thanks, Hol yleaf,” she mewed. “You’l make a great mentor when you have an apprentice of your own.”

“I hope so,” Hol yleaf replied. How can I have an apprentice? How could I teach a young cat about the warrior code, knowing what I know?

She was helping the two apprentices to spread out the moss when she was startled by a sudden yowl of alarm from the clearing. Before she could do more than look up, Rosekit shot into the nursery with every hair on her pelt fluffed up. “It’s ShadowClan!”

she squealed. “ShadowClan cats are in the camp!”

While Daisy reached out to comfort the terrified kit, Hol yleaf thrust her way outside, her claws bared to fight off an attack. But once she was in the open, she relaxed. Only three cats were entering the camp, flanked by Spiderleg and Mousewhisker: Russetfur,

Oakfur, and Ivytail. Firestar was already crossing the clearing to meet them, his flame-colored pelt

gleaming in the scarlet light of the setting sun, while the rest of the Clan gathered behind him.



Hol yleaf padded over to join Lionblaze and

Jayfeather. “What’s al this about?” she whispered.

“More trouble about Sol?”

Lionblaze shook his head. “I’ve no idea.”

“Greetings.” Firestar dipped his head to the

patrol. “Sol has gone.”

“We’re not here about Sol,” Russetfur informed him curtly. “Three of your cats were spotted near the ShadowClan border yesterday—wel outside your

territory. What were they doing?”

“Fox dung!” Jayfeather muttered, while Hol yleaf felt her pelt beginning to bristle. If Firestar finds out what we were doing, we’re crow-food!

“Three ThunderClan cats?” Firestar asked. “Are

you sure?”

“We know ThunderClan scent when we smel it,”

Russetfur retorted. “And Ivytail got a good look at them. Ivytail, point them out.”

The ShadowClan she-cat stepped forward and

swept her tail around to point at Hol yleaf, Lionblaze, and Jayfeather. “Those three.”

A gasp went up from the other ThunderClan cats.

Hol yleaf faced them defiantly. We weren’t bothering ShadowClan! Why do they have to make trouble?



Firestar gave the three littermates a thoughtful glance. Hol yleaf felt her fur grow uncomfortably hot, and she tried not to twitch. Then the ThunderClan leader turned back to the ShadowClan patrol.

“I’m sure my warriors had a very good reason to

be there,” he meowed. “You should know that a medicine cat is hardly likely to be part of an invading patrol. Have you considered that they might have been looking for herbs?”

Al three cats nodded; Jayfeather added,

“Yarrow,” as if he was daring the ShadowClan cats

to contradict him.

“Herbs…” Russetfur hissed the word just loud

enough to be heard; clearly she didn’t believe it, but she wasn’t prepared to accuse the ThunderClan cats

of lying.

“I apologize that they strayed so close to your border,” Firestar continued. “It won’t happen again.”

“See that it doesn’t,” Russetfur retorted. Turning, she gathered her patrol together with a flick of her tail and headed toward the thorn tunnel. Spiderleg and Mousewhisker fol owed, to escort them out of the territory.

At the camp entrance, Russetfur glanced back.



At the camp entrance, Russetfur glanced back.

“Firestar, I hope you get your Clan under control again soon,” she mewed, and vanished into the tunnel before any cat could reply.

Hol yleaf knew her Clanmates were staring at her

and her brothers as Firestar stalked across the clearing to confront them. She forced herself to meet his searing green gaze.

“Whatever you were doing, I don’t want to know.”

His voice was tight with tension. “Just don’t do it again. Do you think I haven’t got enough to deal with right now?”

What about us? Hol yleaf thought resentful y. You

have no idea what we’re going through.

“Sorry, Firestar,” Lionblaze mewed.

Firestar just let out a sigh before bounding off to

join Sandstorm, Graystripe, and the other cats around the fresh-kil pile.

Once he was out of earshot, Hol yleaf turned to her

brothers. “We’l have to—”

She broke off at a warning touch on her shoulder

from Lionblaze’s tail, and glanced around to see Brambleclaw padding up. Oh, great.

The deputy halted and raked the three cats with a



cold yel ow gaze. “Are you going to tel me what you were doing?”

Hol yleaf clamped her jaws shut and stared

mutinously at the tabby warrior. Beside her,

Lionblaze and Jayfeather were silent, too.

“I don’t know what’s gotten into you lately.”

Brambleclaw sighed. “You’re al —”

“Hey, Brambleclaw!” Dustpelt interrupted from

outside the warriors’ den. “I’m leading the evening patrol. Which cats do you want to go with me?”

“I have to go,” Brambleclaw meowed to Hol yleaf and her littermates. “Just try to keep out of trouble, okay?”

Hol yleaf watched him go, then drew her brothers

into a tight huddle. “We’l go back to Sol tomorrow. I don’t care what ShadowClan thinks. We have to know the truth!”

Lionblaze was gazing warily at her, as if he was wondering whether she would lose her temper with Sol again, but Jayfeather just looked thoughtful. At last he nodded. “I agree. This time, he’s got to talk to us. And if he refuses, we’l make him. The prophecy

belongs to us, remember. Not to him.”





CHAPTER 25





Sunhigh had come and gone by the time Hol yleaf

and her brothers were able to slip away and head for the old Twoleg nest. Clouds had gathered during the

night, and by the time they reached the border of their own territory, rain was hissing down steadily.

Once they had crossed the border, Lionblaze led

them by a roundabout route through the spindly trees, keeping as far away as possible from the ShadowClan border. Al three cats stayed alert for any sign of a ShadowClan patrol.

There’ll be real trouble if we’re caught this time,

Hol yleaf thought.

When they reached the old Twoleg nest, Sol was

sitting in the entrance as if he had been expecting them.

“Greetings,” he meowed, rising to his paws as the

three cats picked their way among the dripping brambles to reach the nest. “I thought you would come today.”

“Let’s get this straight.” Hol yleaf drew ahead of the others. “We don’t want any more arguments.

We’l let you help us fulfil the prophecy, as long as you tel us the name of our father.”

Sol’s eyes glowed as he gazed at her, and

Hol yleaf shivered. Once she had felt as if she could spend her whole life looking into this cat’s eyes and hearing his voice. Even though she knew how

dangerous he was, she stil wasn’t quite free from the snare of his charm.

“Shal we go inside?” Sol offered, as if this was nothing more than a friendly visit.



Hol yleaf and the others fol owed him into the damp interior and shook the raindrops from their pelts before finding a place to crouch on the cracked stones.

“You might need to find a new place to stay,”

Hol yleaf warned the loner. “ShadowClan sent a patrol to report us to Firestar for being outside our territory.”

“What?” Sol’s fur began to bristle. “Blackstar dared to do that? Is he al owed to dictate where cats go outside his own borders?”

“Wel , he thinks he is,” Jayfeather muttered.

“You were doing nothing wrong!” Sol declared, his

fur fluffing up even more and his amber eyes burning.

“Blackstar is using this as a way to humiliate ThunderClan.”

“I’m not sure.” Lionblaze was looking uneasy. “I think Blackstar is just being a bit overly keen to prove that he’s keeping the warrior code again.”

Sol gave a snort of contempt. “The warrior code!

Belief in StarClan! I can’t understand why you cats think al that is so important.”

Hol yleaf’s bel y lurched. No! The warrior code matters more than anything! But she knew that she



had to stay calm. If they quarreled with Sol, they would lose the chance of discovering who their father was.

“I know so much more than StarClan does,” Sol continued. “Did they tel you that the sun would vanish? You know very wel they didn’t. Doesn’t that make me more powerful than your warrior

ancestors? And if I’m so powerful without a

prophecy, then the powers you three share must be

magnificent!”

Lionblaze’s eyes glowed, and Jayfeather was

unconsciously flexing his claws in and out. Hol yleaf had to make a huge effort not to be enthral ed by Sol’s voice. So far he’s given us nothing, she reminded herself. His words are nothing but mist and sunshine, impossible to hold down.

“That’s al very wel ,” she snapped, “but what do we have to do?”

“ShadowClan cats are worthless!” Sol went on.

“They have no right to their territory—and if they are left alone, they’l soon be invading yours. You need to fake evidence that ShadowClan is stealing

ThunderClan prey, so that your Clan leader can launch an attack on them. Once you have



launch an attack on them. Once you have

ShadowClan’s territory, you can invade RiverClan and WindClan.” He glanced around, lowering his voice to a deep, vibrating purr as he continued,

“That’s what absolute power is. Control ing every cat in the territories by the lake!”

Hol yleaf stared at Sol, feeling her paws tingle.

Was this real y what they had to do to gain power—

fight against every cat in the rival Clans? She tried to imagine Firestar al owing that to happen, and

couldn’t.

“I don’t think—” she began uncertainly.

But Sol wasn’t listening to her. He padded off into

a far corner of the den and hauled a rabbit out of the shadows. As he dropped it in front of her, Hol yleaf picked up the scent of ShadowClan mingled with the

smel of fresh-kil .

“I caught this in ShadowClan territory, and rubbed

it on their scent markers,” Sol explained. “You can take it back to the camp with you, and tel your Clan that you chased off a ShadowClan patrol.” His eyes

glinted

with

cold

amusement.

“What

can

ShadowClan do to deny it? Those stupid cats, they’d

rather believe in nursery tales about dead ancestors than try figuring things out for themselves. Al that nonsense about signs from StarClan!”

Hol yleaf glanced at Lionblaze; he was staring at Sol with narrowed eyes, and his neck fur was slowly

rising.

“You’re no different from Tigerstar,” Lionblaze growled. “You don’t want this for our sake. This is your ambition.”

Bunching his muscles, he launched himself

upward, his claws extended toward Sol. Hol yleaf flung herself at him, just managing to knock him away before he slashed into Sol’s pelt.

“What are you doing?” she gasped, pinning her brother to the floor.

“This isn’t part of the prophecy.” Lionblaze shook

Hol yleaf off and sat up, glaring at Sol. “He just wants to use us. The power is ours, not his!”

“You’re right.” Jayfeather rose to his paws and flicked his tail toward Sol, who had not flinched at Lionblaze’s attack or tried to respond to his accusation. “Sol doesn’t care about us. He’s stil fighting his private battle with ShadowClan because

Blackstar made him leave their territory. That battle has nothing to do with us. The truth about our father exists somewhere, but this is not the way to find it.”

Lionblaze rose to his paws. “We’re leaving,” he announced. “And we’re not coming back.”

Hol yleaf stared at him in disbelief. “We can’t!” she protested. “We need to know—”

“We don’t need anything that Sol can tel us,”

Lionblaze insisted. “We’ve been fools to trust him, when we know what he’s done to other cats. Can’t you see that he just wants war between al the Clans? The prophecy says nothing about that. It says we were born with power—we shouldn’t have to fight

for it! Come on.”

He strode out of the den with Jayfeather hard on

his paws. Hol yleaf took a pace after him, then glanced over her shoulder at Sol, but the loner simply stared back at her, giving her no help.

With a hiss of mingled fury and desperation,

Hol yleaf sprang after her littermates. We’re the Three! I can’t do this on my own!

Lionblaze and Jayfeather stood a few fox-lengths

away from the den, waiting for her in the pouring rain.

As she joined them, Sol appeared in the entrance.

“Wait!” he cal ed. “Don’t you want to know who your father is?”



Lionblaze ignored him. “Come on,” he meowed to

Hol yleaf. “This isn’t the only way to find the truth. We have to do this for ourselves, not for any other cat.”

Hol yleaf bowed her head, giving in, but as she picked her way through the soaking grass beside Lionblaze she could stil feel Sol’s amber gaze burning into her pelt.





CHAPTER 26





By the time the three littermates stumbled back into the hol ow, Jayfeather was so exhausted he could hardly feel his paws, and the rain had plastered his pelt to his sides. He felt as if he were struggling in a vast cobweb woven of lies and shadows, with an unseen spider waiting to pounce.



Back in the old Twoleg nest, he had been certain

that they were right to abandon Sol, but now he wasn’t so sure. What if the loner real y was the only way to the truth?

And what are we going to say when Firestar asks

us where we’ve been? He’ll claw us to pieces and toss us on the fresh-kill pile!

But as he staggered into the clearing, he heard a

buzz of excitement rising from his Clanmates, who were clustered together near the nursery. No cat was paying any attention to Jayfeather or his littermates.

“What’s going on?” Lionblaze asked.

A sudden rush of paw steps answered him as

Foxpaw raced up to them. “It’s Whitewing!” he burst

out. “She’s having her kits.”

At the same moment, Jayfeather heard

Brightheart cal ing from the nursery. “Jayfeather!

Come quick—Leafpool needs you!”

Jayfeather stifled a sigh. He would far rather have

crept into his nest to dry off his pelt and sleep.

Instead he headed for the nursery, brushing past Birchfal , who was tearing up grass in his anxiety.

Inside, Daisy and Mil ie had drawn their own kits

into their nests to give Whitewing and Leafpool space. The young white she-cat was lying on one side, her breath coming fast and shal ow.

“You’re doing fine,” Leafpool reassured her. “And

so are your kits. They’l be born before you know it.”

“I hope so,” Whitewing panted.

Even though Leafpool sounded calm, Jayfeather

could sense her fear. Leaning over, she whispered in his ear, “She’s exhausted. I’m afraid she won’t have enough strength left to deliver the kits.”

Jayfeather rested one paw lightly on Whitewing’s

distended bel y and concentrated. He could feel a double heartbeat inside her, frail but steady. “She’s having two kits,” he announced. “Come on,

Whitewing! You can do it.”

It’s okay, little kits, he thought as he crouched over the laboring she-cat, murmuring encouragement.

You’re nearly safe. Just a little farther.

Suddenly his mind slid into Whitewing’s. He heard

a vicious snarling and saw a vision of gaping fangs

and lol ing tongues, as if the young white queen was imagining her kits savaged by dogs, just as her mother Brightheart had been. He heard the screech

of battle with other Clans and saw blood wel ing in deep claw marks, scarlet against pale fur. He felt the grip of hunger in his bel y as he looked out across a forest deep under the snow.

Jayfeather started back, his mind reeling. Does a

mother really imagine her kits’ whole lives before they’re born? He sensed Whitewing’s terror as she

lay silently begging him for help.

Recovering, he bent close to the young she-cat.

“Don’t worry,” he whispered. “Your daughters wil be fine. They wil be loved and protected by their Clanmates.” He stroked one paw gently across

Whitewing’s bel y. “It’s time now.”

“Yes,” Whitewing gasped.

Jayfeather felt a strong ripple pass through her bel y. She let out a screech, and a tiny wet bundle slithered out onto the moss.

“Is she al right?” Whitewing panted.

“She’s fine,” Jayfeather assured her. “Now the next one.”

Whitewing lay stil for a moment; then her back arched as another ripple passed across her bel y, and a second tiny bundle slid into the nest.

“Wel done!” Leafpool exclaimed. “Greetings, little

kits. Welcome to ThunderClan.”

The first kit squeaked loudly, and Leafpool uttered



The first kit squeaked loudly, and Leafpool uttered

a soft mrrow of laughter. “This one’s tiny, but she’s strong. There, little ones, go to your mother.”

“They’re beautiful!” Whitewing purred. “Thank you,

Jayfeather. And you, Leafpool.” With one paw, she drew the tiny kits toward her and started to lick them vigorously.

A wave of triumph swept through Jayfeather as he

headed for the entrance to the nursery. “Birchfal !” he cal ed. “Come and meet your daughters.”

Birchfal brushed past Jayfeather as he stumbled

inside. Jayfeather almost staggered under the wave

of his relief and joy. “Whitewing, are you okay?” he choked out. “Oh, thank StarClan! What beautiful kits!”

Crouching beside Leafpool as she tended to

Whitewing, Jayfeather wondered whether she had

felt the same when he and her other kits were born.

Did our father share that joy?

More than anything, he wanted to talk to Leafpool,

to hear her side of the story and learn the truth. In the closeness of working together, he felt for a few heartbeats that it might be possible. “Leafpool…,” he began.



Leafpool turned to him. “She’l be fine now,” the medicine cat meowed, cutting off what Jayfeather meant to say. “Go and fetch me some strengthening

herbs, and a few leaves of borage to help her milk come.”

The moment was gone. “Sure,” Jayfeather replied,

and slipped out of the nursery.

By the time he had delivered the herbs, the rain was easing off. Jayfeather padded over to the fresh-kil pile for a bite to eat before he went back to his den. Several cats were clustered around it, sharing prey; their delight washed over Jayfeather as he crouched to gulp down his vole.

“It’s hard to give birth to kits in leaf-bare,”

Ferncloud mewed. “Whitewing has done real y wel .”

“She’l raise them wel , too.” That was Mousefur, sounding less crotchety than usual. “Whitewing is one of the best cats in this Clan. When she was an

apprentice she always made sure we had fresh

moss, and it was dry, too.”

“We’l al have to watch our tails when these kits are old enough to leave the nursery.” Dustpelt’s voice held a hint of amusement. “They have your blood, Cloudtail, and we al know what a hard time you gave Firestar when you were a kit.”

Cloudtail snorted. “They’l be fine warriors,

Dustpelt, and I’l claw any cat who says different.”

Jayfeather, who was eating his prey, paused for a

heartbeat as Hol yleaf and Lionblaze padded up and

sat down beside him, listening to the cheerful talk in silence. None of them wanted to join in, but Jayfeather sensed that al of them felt cut off from one another, too.

“I remember when you three were kits,”

Brackenfur meowed; paw steps approached and the

golden brown tabby flicked Jayfeather on the ear with his tail. “Chasing foxes! It’s a wonder any of you survived to be apprentices.”

“Yeah, right,” Jayfeather muttered. Suddenly the happiness of his Clanmates was more than he could

bear. Without another word, even to his littermates, he swal owed the last mouthful of vole and headed for his den.





Curled up in his nest, Jayfeather woke to the sound of paw steps, and opened his eyes to see a

skinny gray she-cat bending over him.

“Yel owfang!” he exclaimed, sitting up. He was stil

in the medicine cats’ den, bathed in the pale glow of moonlight. Leafpool was curled up asleep a couple

of tail-lengths away.

The former medicine cat dropped a long dark

feather onto the moss of Jayfeather’s nest. “The time for lies and secrets is over,” she meowed. “The truth must come out. StarClan was wrong not to tel you who you were a long time ago.”



who you were a long time ago.”

“Then what—?” Jayfeather began, but already

Yel owfang’s shape was beginning to fade, melting into the moonlight until she was gone. The moonlight abruptly vanished, leaving Jayfeather in darkness as he woke from his dream.

“Mouse dung! Why can’t any cat speak straight out?” he hissed. But an icy weight in his bel y made him realize that Yel owfang had told him al he needed to know.

Feeling around his nest, he found the feather she

had dropped, and drew his paw down the long, smooth length. He could picture how it had gleamed

black in the silver moonlight.

“She brought me a crow’s feather…,” he

whispered.

Scrambling out of his nest, he padded softly out of

the den, taking care not to wake Leafpool. Once he

was in the clearing, he bounded over to the warriors’

den. He crept around the outside of it, tasting the air until he located Lionblaze sleeping close to the outer branches.

Jayfeather scrabbled around to find a loose bit of

branch and poked it through the thorns until he felt the other end prod Lionblaze.

“Uh? Get off!” Lionblaze swatted at the branch.

“Lionblaze!” Jayfeather hissed, pressing as close

as he could to his brother inside the den. “I have to talk to you. Fetch Hol yleaf.”

“It’s the middle of the night!” Lionblaze protested.

“Keep your voice down! Do you want to wake

every cat in the camp? This is important! We have to go somewhere.”

“Okay, okay, keep your fur on.”

Jayfeather waited impatiently until his littermates pushed their way out through the branches.

“What do you mean, ‘go somewhere’?” Lionblaze

whispered. “Where?”

“Into the forest. Somewhere we can talk.”

Hol yleaf yawned. “This had better be worth it.”

“It wil be,” Jayfeather promised.

Al three cats slid out of the camp through the dirtplace tunnel, clinging to the shadows so as not to alert Poppyfrost, who was on watch. Then Jayfeather

led them through the trees in the direction of the WindClan border.

“It’s freezing out here,” Hol yleaf complained. “I’m not going another paw step until you explain.”



“Okay.” Jayfeather turned to face his littermates. “I know who our father is.” He hesitated, almost knocked over by the sudden surge of feelings that came from his brother and sister. He took a deep breath and went on. “It’s Crowfeather.”

For a few heartbeats there was silence. The

emotions that churned out of his littermates now were so complex that Jayfeather knew he could never unravel them.

“We’re half-Clan?” Hol yleaf choked out at last.

“How do you know about this?” Lionblaze

sounded baffled.

“Yel owfang came to me in a dream,” Jayfeather explained. “She told me it was time we knew the truth, and she brought me a crow’s feather.”

“But that stil might not mean…” Hol yleaf’s protest died away. Al three cats knew the meaning of the sign. There was no point trying to pretend it wasn’t true.

“Does Crowfeather know about this?” Lionblaze

demanded.

“Is that why Leafpool had to keep us a secret?”

Hol yleaf put in.

Their questions battered at Jayfeather. “I don’t know,” he told them. “We have to talk to Crowfeather.

Come on.”

The three cats headed silently through the forest.

Drops from the recent heavy rain spattered their pelts as they brushed through the undergrowth. A chil breeze sprang up, ruffling their fur. Above his head, Jayfeather could hear the first chirps of waking birds.

His mind was spinning. How could this have

happened? Their mother was a medicine cat, their

father a WindClan warrior. Both of them should have

known they could never be together.

How can we be part of the prophecy when we

should never have been born?

Padding along by Jayfeather’s side, Lionblaze

was sending out steady surges of rage, a burning fury toward those cats who had abandoned the

warrior code and piled up a heap of lies for the kits who were born as a result. On his other side, Hol yleaf was dazed, her whirling thoughts stil too difficult to read.

At last Jayfeather could hear the gurgling of the border stream and taste the scent of fresh water. “It’s stil early,” he remarked, “but we might spot their stil early,” he remarked, “but we might spot their dawn patrol.”

They drew to a halt on the bank of the stream.

Jayfeather’s legs were trembling with weariness; he

would have liked to sink down into the long grass at the water’s edge, but he knew he had to confront his father standing on his paws.

Birdsong grew louder around them, and the bitter

cold of night gradual y eased. At last Jayfeather caught a whiff of WindClan scent; at the same moment Hol yleaf exclaimed, “There they are!”

“Owlwhisker, Gorsetail, and Weaselfur,” Lionblaze

meowed. “Wait here. I’m going to talk to them.”

“Wait—” Jayfeather protested as he heard

Lionblaze leap across the stream, but his brother was gone, too angry to worry about crossing the border.

“What do you think you’re doing?” Owlwhisker

demanded.

Al Lionblaze’s suppressed rage came out in his voice. “Fetch Crowfeather. Now.”

“What?” Weaselfur exclaimed indignantly. “Who

do you think you are, tel ing us what to do?”

“Yeah,” Gorsetail added. “Get back into your own



territory, or we’l tear your fur off.”

A low growl came from Lionblaze; Jayfeather

pictured him looming over the three WindClan cats,

his golden fur fluffed out until he was twice his size.

“Just do it!” he ordered.

“Okay,” Owlwhisker mewed, his voice shril as he

tried to conceal his fear. “But you can wait on your own side of the border.”

Jayfeather heard the WindClan warriors bounding

away, then a thud as Lionblaze jumped back across

the stream and landed beside him. His claws tore up

the grass as they waited, as if his fury had to find some kind of outlet.

Jayfeather’s bel y churned when he caught the

scent of an approaching WindClan cat on the

breeze. Just one: Crowfeather had come alone. He

could feel Hol yleaf quivering beside him; her tail kept twitching, brushing against his pelt.

At last Crowfeather’s voice came from the other side of the border. “What do you want?”

Words choked in Jayfeather’s throat as the three

littermates faced the WindClan warrior across the stream. He heard a sharp intake of breath from Hol yleaf.



But Lionblaze didn’t hesitate. “Brambleclaw and Squirrelflight are not our parents,” he declared.

“Leafpool is our mother and you are our father.”

There was a pause. Then, “Don’t be mouse-

brained,” Crowfeather snapped. “That’s impossible.”

He sounded so certain that for a heartbeat

Jayfeather wondered if they could possibly be

mistaken. Taking a deep breath, he stepped into Crowfeather’s mind. A tangle of undergrowth faced him, and he realized that he was standing at the top of the cliff above the stone hol ow. Leafpool was clinging to the edge, her face upturned pleadingly as Crowfeather grabbed her by the scruff and hauled her back to safety.

Then he glimpsed them crouched together under

a bush, and heard Crowfeather meow, “Come away

with me, Leafpool. I’l take good care of you, I promise.” Now the two of them were trekking side by

side up a long slope of moorland, then in a hol ow, talking to Midnight the badger. “I have to go back,”

Leafpool mewed.

Caterwauling ripped through Jayfeather’s vision

and he glimpsed the stone hol ow ful of warring badgers, while his Clanmates attacked them



fiercely. Last of al , Leafpool faced Crowfeather in the clearing, among the debris of the battle. “Your heart lies here,” Crowfeather murmured; Jayfeather could hardly believe the warrior could sound so gentle. “Not with me. It was never truly with me.”

The vision had taken no more than a moment, but

when Jayfeather let go of the WindClan warrior’s mind, he was sure that Yel owfang’s sign had not deceived him. Just as he was sure that Crowfeather

had no idea he had fathered Leafpool’s kits.

“It’s true,” he meowed. “You didn’t know, did you?”

“No….” For a heartbeat, Crowfeather sounded

dazed. Then Jayfeather felt anger growing within him. “I have one mate,” he snarled. “Her name is Nightcloud. We have one son, Breezepelt. I don’t know why you’ve come to me with these lies. Go home, and don’t come back. Why should I care about ThunderClan cats? You mean nothing to me.

Nothing!”

Jayfeather heard a gasp from Hol yleaf, and the sound of Lionblaze’s claws scraping against stone.

Calmly he faced his father. “The truth is out now,”

he warned. “None of us can hide from it again.”





CHAPTER 27





The rest of the day passed in a haze of pain, and when Hol yleaf final y curled up in her nest, her dreams were ful of darkness. Thick undergrowth surrounded her, leaving scarcely a glimpse of the sky. She heard cats yowling at a distance, but however fast she ran toward them, she never

managed to catch up with them.

When she woke to see dawn light filtering through

the branches of the den, she stil felt exhausted, as though she had real y been running through that dark forest. She staggered to her paws and prodded Lionblaze.

“What are we going to do?” she demanded in an



urgent whisper as her brother blinked up at her. “I can’t go on like this!”

“I don’t know.” Lionblaze gave a quick glance around the den, as if he was afraid that some cat would overhear. “We’l talk later.” He pushed his way out through the branches; convinced that he was trying to avoid her, Hol yleaf fol owed hard on his paws.

“Hol yleaf! Lionblaze!” Brambleclaw spotted them

as soon as they emerged from the warriors’ den.

“Sandstorm is taking out a hunting patrol. Can you go with her?”

“Sure,” Lionblaze meowed, swerving across the

clearing to where Sandstorm waited beside the

deputy with Berrynose and Hazeltail.

Hol yleaf was stil dazed as she fol owed, as if her paws belonged to some other cat. How could she fit

into the Clan’s everyday routine, now that she knew

the terrible secret of her birth? She felt as if the sky should have cracked open or the moon fal en down

into the hol ow.

“Don’t forget, it’s the Gathering tonight,”

Brambleclaw reminded them. “The Clan needs to

eat wel before the journey.”



“We wil —don’t worry,” Sandstorm promised, her

whiskers twitching as she signaled to her patrol with her tail and headed for the camp entrance.

Hol yleaf fol owed, but she couldn’t concentrate on

hunting. Pain dazzled her mind like lightning splitting the sky. She had built her life on the warrior code, and now it had failed her. It didn’t matter anymore; it had been broken too many times. Squirrelflight had

broken it by lying; Crowfeather, by fal ing in love with a medicine cat; but most of al , Leafpool had shattered the code and trampled it into dust. She had betrayed her Clan, her duty as a medicine cat,

and her kits.

A mouse darted out in front of Hol yleaf’s paws and instinctively she leaped on it, her claws sinking into the soft body. A picture of Leafpool flashed in front of her eyes in a pulsing red haze, and she tore at the prey, imagining that she was clawing the life out of the cat she hated so much.

“Hol yleaf, stop!” Hazeltail’s voice was shocked.

“What are you doing?”

Hol yleaf’s vision cleared. She saw her paws

dripping with scarlet: The prey she had caught was

reduced to a red pulp. There was nothing left to take back to the fresh-kil pile.

Fury surging through her, she rounded on

Hazeltail. “Stay out of my fur!”

Hazeltail backed away, her eyes wide and

scared, then whipped around and plunged away into

the bracken.





After the hunting patrol returned, Hol yleaf was too disturbed to stay in the camp. She didn’t want to talk anymore, especial y not to Lionblaze or Jayfeather.



Instead she headed out alone, down to the lake and

then along the WindClan border until she reached the ridge and could look out across the rol ing moorland.

Somewhere out there was the WindClan camp

and the cat who was her father. His WindClan blood

ran in her veins. But I don’t feel half-WindClan!

Hol yleaf knew her home was under the trees,

hunting mice and squirrels. The WindClan rabbits looked scrawny and tasteless from running across the hil s. She hated the open spaces and the unrelenting wind.

Gazing out across her father’s territory, she

yowled silently, No! No! No!





As shadows fel across the stone hol ow, Firestar

cal ed together the cats who were going to the Gathering. Hol yleaf padded up to join Jayfeather and

Lionblaze,

deliberately

not

looking

at

Squirrelflight and Leafpool a few paces away.

Graystripe, Brambleclaw, and Sandstorm bounded

up, fol owed by Cinderheart, Poppyfrost, and

Berrynose.

“Let’s go,” Firestar meowed. “And the less we say

about Sol, the better, okay?”

He led them down to the lake and along the edge

of the water, splashing through the border stream.

Hol yleaf felt every hair on her pelt prickle with disgust as she set paw on WindClan territory. I don’t belong here! I want nothing to do with WindClan!

More rain had fal en earlier in the day, but now the clouds had cleared away, leaving the ful moon to shine brightly. Hol yleaf stopped and stared up at it.

Do you approve of what I’m going to do, StarClan?



With every paw step she was alert for the sight or

scent of WindClan cats. She wondered if

Crowfeather had been chosen to go to the

Gathering. Why should it matter? she thought

fiercely. He’s nothing to me. Nothing!

Just ahead of her, Firestar was flanked by

Graystripe and Sandstorm. “You know, I stil miss Fourtrees,” Sandstorm murmured. “The moon

seemed brighter there, somehow.”

Firestar gave her an affectionate nudge. “You

sound like an elder!”

Sandstorm swatted at him with her tail. “You wait.

I’l be the crankiest elder the Clans have ever seen.

Mousefur wil seem sweet and gentle next to me!”

“And hedgehogs wil fly,” Graystripe meowed. “But

I miss the old forest, too,” he added. “It’s the place we were born. These younger cats wil feel just the same about the lake. Isn’t that right?” He glanced over his shoulder at Lionblaze and Hol yleaf.

Lionblaze managed a brief nod, but Hol yleaf

couldn’t reply at al . Sheer envy surged over her, jealousy of these cats who knew where they

belonged, who had good memories of living by the warrior code, season after season.



They don’t know it’s all a lie!

The horseplace was dark and silent when the

ThunderClan cats padded past. There was stil no sign of WindClan; Hol yleaf assumed they had

already made their way to the island.

When they reached the tree-bridge, they found

RiverClan in the middle of crossing; Firestar held back his warriors with a polite nod to Leopardstar.

While she waited, Hol yleaf flexed her claws in and out, her bel y churning.

This will be a Gathering none of them will ever forget!

Leaping from the roots at the other end of the tree-bridge, she paused to taste the mingled scents

of the other three Clans.

“We’re the last,” Cinderheart meowed, landing

beside her. “We’d better be quick.”

Hol yleaf fol owed her Clanmate across the strip of

pebbles and into the undergrowth. There was no need to hurry. She had set her paws on the path she

had chosen, and the time for her to act would come

as surely as one season gave way to the next.

When she pushed through the bushes and into the

clearing around the Great Oak, she hesitated, awed



in spite of herself by the mass of cats in front of her.

Clan mixed with Clan as the cats found themselves

places around the tree. Then Hol yleaf’s paws

carried her forward, weaving a path through the crowd. She was scarcely aware of Tawnypelt

greeting her, or of the ShadowClan queen’s

affronted look as she brushed past. She ignored the

snatches of gossip that she picked up as she padded past. What has all that got to do with me now?

She found a place to sit, close to the Great Oak,

where she could look up and see the Clan leaders crouched among the branches: Onestar, comfortably

settled in the fork of a branch; Blackstar, crouched on the lowest branch with his tail hanging down; Leopardstar,

standing

a

tail-length

higher,

impatiently scratching at the bark. Firestar leaped up to join them, scattering a few late acorns as the branch he chose swayed under him.

Lionblaze had fol owed Hol yleaf across the

clearing, and sat down next to her. “Crowfeather’s here,” he muttered.

“I know.” Hol yleaf had already spotted the

WindClan warrior, but he hadn’t seemed to notice WindClan warrior, but he hadn’t seemed to notice her. Now she glanced to where Lionblaze was

pointing with his tail, and she saw her father sitting close to Nightcloud and Breezepelt. His head was turned away, but Hol yleaf guessed that he knew exactly where she and her brothers were. All his kits together at once. How nice for him.

A shril yowl sounded from the branches of the tree, and Leopardstar stepped forward. The noise in

the clearing stil ed as the cats fel silent and turned to look up at her.

“The Gathering has begun,” she announced.

“RiverClan wil report first. Prey is running wel .

Mistyfoot, Reedwhisker, and Rainstorm drove a fox out of our territory.” She stepped back with a curt nod to Blackstar.

The ShadowClan leader rose, while below him

Hol yleaf drove her claws into the ground, her whole body quivering with tension. Suddenly she wasn’t sure she would know when her time to act had come.

StarClan, give me a sign! If you’re even watching….

“ShadowClan is thriving,” Blackstar reported.

“Littlecloud has taken Flamepaw as his apprentice, and introduced him to StarClan at the Moonpool.”



A murmur of congratulation rose from the

assembled cats, with a few yowls of “Flamepaw!

Flamepaw!” Hol yleaf spotted the young cat sitting with Littlecloud and the other medicine cats, his eyes shining with pride. Claws tore at her heart. I felt like that once.

Onestar fol owed Blackstar, but he had nothing to

tel them about except a dead sheep in the border stream, which his warriors had dragged out to keep

the water clean.

Then it was Firestar’s turn. Rising to his paws, he

balanced on his branch and looked down into the clearing with his green eyes glowing in the

moonlight. “Sol has left the forest,” he began. “We—”

“About time, too,” Blackstar growled.

Leopardstar dipped her head to Firestar with cold

courtesy. “I’m glad you saw sense at last, Firestar.”

Firestar returned the nod equal y politely, though Hol yleaf could see his claws tighten on his branch.

“Besides that—”

Now!

“Wait!” Hol yleaf leaped to her paws. “There’s something that I have to say that al the Clans should hear.”



“What?” Lionblaze reached up and dragged at her

with one paw, trying to get her to sit down again.

“Are you mouse-brained? Warriors don’t speak

here!”

“This one does,” Hol yleaf hissed, shaking him off.

She spotted Jayfeather among the other medicine cats, his expression utterly horrified, but she ignored him.

“You think you—” she began.

“Hol yleaf!” Firestar’s voice rang out from the branch where he stood looking down at her; his eyes

smoldered with green fire. “If you have anything important to say here, it should have been discussed with me first. Be silent now, and whatever’s troubling you, I’l talk to you about it tomorrow.”

Moons spent fol owing the warrior code almost

forced Hol yleaf to clamp her jaws shut and sit down.

I have to obey my Clan leader! Then she braced herself. The warrior code is dead! There’s no point

in trying to follow it anymore.

“No!” she meowed, ignoring the gasps of shock from the cats around her. “I will speak now!”

“Yes, let her speak.” Leopardstar stepped forward

again, looking down curiously at Hol yleaf. “I’d like to hear what she has to say.”

“So would I,” Onestar growled.

“Or has ThunderClan got secrets that they’re too scared to reveal?” Blackstar taunted, flicking his tail contemptuously at Firestar.

Yowling broke out al around the clearing as the cats from the other three Clans chal enged

ThunderClan. Hol yleaf stood in the middle of the uproar, feeling strangely calm; she knew she needed

to wait only a few heartbeats more.

At last Firestar raised his tail for silence. “Very wel , Hol yleaf,” he mewed when the noise had died

down. “Say what you have to. And StarClan grant you don’t regret it.”

Now the clearing was so quiet that Hol yleaf could

hear a mouse scuttering among the dead leaves under the Great Oak. “You think you know me,” she

began again. “And my brothers, Lionblaze and

Jayfeather of ThunderClan. You think you know us, but everything you have been told about us is a lie!

We are not the kits of Brambleclaw and

Squirrelflight.”

“What?” Brambleclaw shot to his paws from

where he sat with the other deputies among the where he sat with the other deputies among the roots of the Great Oak. His amber eyes flamed.

“Squirrelflight, why is she talking such nonsense?”

Squirrelflight stood up. The flare of panic in her eyes faded and was replaced with—what? Regret?

Guilt? Or the sorrow of a mother who was about to

lose her kits forever…?

“I’m sorry, Brambleclaw, but it’s true. I’m not their mother, and you are not their father.”

The Clan deputy stared at her. “Then who is?”

Squirrelflight turned her sad green gaze on the cat

she had always claimed as her daughter. “Tel them,

Hol yleaf. I kept the secret for seasons; I’m not going to reveal it now.”

“Coward!” Hol yleaf flashed at her. Her gaze

swept around the clearing, seeing the eyes of every

single cat trained on her. “I’m not afraid of the truth!

Leafpool is our mother, and Crowfeather—yes,

Crowfeather of WindClan—is our father.”

Yowls of shock greeted her words, but Hol yleaf shouted over them. “These cats were so ashamed of

us that they gave us away and lied to every single one of you to hide the fact that they had broken the warrior code. It’s al her fault.” She whipped her tail around to point at Leafpool. “How can the Clans survive when there are cowards and liars at the very heart of them?”

The screeches and gasps of horror grew so loud

that Hol yleaf couldn’t make herself heard anymore.

But there was no need. She had said what she had

come to say. Her legs trembled as if she had run al

the way across the territory, and she had to sit down.

Inside she felt a curious peace, as if she had lanced a festering sore and was watching the poison drain

away.

Crowfeather’s voice rose above the rest in a

furious yowl. “It’s not true!” He had sprung to his paws, his dark gray fur bristling. Beside him, Nightcloud and Breezepelt looked bewildered and angry. “She’s the one who’s lying!”

Then Leafpool stood up. The crowd of cats fel silent, their eyes turned toward her.

“It’s true, Crowfeather,” she meowed. “I’m sorry. I

wanted to tel you, but there was never a right time.”

Her amber eyes were seared with grief. Pity

stirred in Hol yleaf, but she choked it down. I hate her! She lied and betrayed us all!

“You

mean

nothing

to

me,

Leafpool.”



Crowfeather’s voice was cold. “That moon has

passed. My loyalty is only to WindClan, and I have no kits other than Breezepelt.” He glanced to where Nightcloud and Breezepelt stood beside him; the black she-cat had her ears flattened to her head, while Breezepelt’s teeth were bared in a snarl.

Leafpool dipped her head as if she wasn’t going

to argue; then she looked up at Firestar, who was crouched on his branch, as stil as a cat made out of stone. “I know that I cannot be ThunderClan’s medicine cat any longer,” she meowed. “I’m so very

sorry to you, Firestar, and to al my Clanmates.

Please know that I tried my best, and regretted what I had done with every single breath.” Her voice cracked on the last word, and she paused,

swal owing, before she continued. “But I couldn’t regret having my kits. They are fine cats, and I wil always be proud of them.”

She gave Crowfeather one last glance, then

padded across the clearing with her head bowed.

Cats scrambled out of her way as she made for the

bushes and pushed her way through, out of sight.

Every cat stared after her, stil shocked into silence.

Brambleclaw was the first to move, padding



forward until he stood face to face with Squirrelflight.

“Why?” he meowed.

Squirrelflight’s voice was desperate. “I had to!

She’s my sister!”

“And you couldn’t trust me?” Brambleclaw’s voice

was shaking, and Hol yleaf saw a deep shudder pass through his body. For a heartbeat, she was sorry for what she had done. This was a noble cat,

and he had not been responsible for any of the lies. I was so proud when I thought he was my father.

Squirrelflight did not reply, just held his gaze without flinching.

“You couldn’t trust me,” he repeated. “Don’t you think I would have helped you, if you’d told me the truth? But it’s too late now.”

He turned away, shouldering a path through the crowd.

“Brambleclaw—” Squirrelflight took a pace after him, then halted, her head hanging and her tail drooping in despair.

Hol yleaf turned her back. Let her suffer. She deserves it!

A cat nudged her from behind. It was Cinderheart.

“What have you done?” she cried.



“What have you done?” she cried.

Hol yleaf blinked in surprise. “I did the right thing.”

The gray she-cat shook her head. “There is no right thing. Everything to do with this leads to more pain.” The wisdom in her voice seemed to come from a much older and more experienced cat.

Hol yleaf waited for her to say something else, something to show how sorry she felt for Hol yleaf and her littermates. But Cinderheart just turned and padded away.

Hol yleaf stared after her. Why didn’t she

understand? Surely any cat could see that they couldn’t have carried on living a lie? Besides, StarClan hadn’t sent clouds to cover the moon. Her

warrior ancestors must be pleased that the secrets were out and the deceit was at an end.

But none of the cats here seemed pleased. Not even her own Clanmates. Sandstorm was staring at

her, bewilderment and sorrow in her green gaze.

Graystripe’s amber eyes were blank with disbelief.

Poppyfrost and Berrynose had their heads close together, talking urgently and shooting hostile glances at her.

Suddenly Hol yleaf couldn’t bear to be stared at for another heartbeat. Blundering through the crowd, she thrust through the bushes, ignoring the thorns that tore her pelt, and fled across the strip of pebbles and over the tree-bridge. Racing past the

horseplace, she began to climb the ridge, skirting the WindClan border until she reached the very top

and could look out over the lake.

A silver path of moonlight stretched across the surface of the water. The reflections of countless warriors of StarClan glittered around it.

“Was it al worth it?” Hol yleaf wailed to them.

“Being an apprentice, working hard to learn the warrior code? What could any of us have done to make things different?”

The flickering stars gave her no answer.

Hol yleaf padded along the ridge until she reached

her own territory and could plunge back into the trees. When she arrived in the stone hol ow,

everything was quiet. The Gathering patrol had not yet returned, and the other cats were asleep, except for Brightheart, on watch beside the entrance.

Hol yleaf brushed past her, ignoring the she-cat’s greeting.

She stalked across the clearing in the bright wash



of moonlight and entered the medicine cats’ den.

Her heartbeat quickened when she saw there was no sign of Leafpool. I know what I’m going to do. All this is Leafpool’s fault.

Crawling right to the back of the storage cave, she

found the leaf wrap with the deathberries and drew it out careful y. She placed it on the floor of the den and unfolded the leaf so the glossy red berries were exposed. They had begun to shrivel, but she knew they stil held their deadly poison.

Hol yleaf sat beside the berries, wrapped her tail

over her paws, and waited. Soon she heard a slow

paw step outside, and Leafpool brushed past the bramble screen and stood in front of her.

“Hol yleaf.” She didn’t sound surprised to find her

daughter there. Her eyes were ful of weariness and

sorrow. “It’s al right,” she mewed. “I forgive you.”

“What!” Hol yleaf sprang to her paws. “You forgive

me? You’re the one who needs forgiveness! You abandoned your kits! You let us grow up in a web of

lies, and now the warrior code might be broken forever because of your stupid, selfish actions.”

“Do you think you need to tel me that?” Leafpool

asked, stil with the same exhausted calm. “I can only tel you how much I love you. I’m so sorry for what I did.”

“And you expect me to forgive you?” Hol yleaf snarled. “Wel , I don’t. I never wil .” Fur bristling, she padded around Leafpool until she blocked the

entrance to the den. “See those deathberries?

You’re going to eat them—or I’l make you!”

“What?” Leafpool sounded bewildered.

“Eat them! You deserve to die.” Hol yleaf

crouched, ready to spring, when the medicine cat made no move toward the deadly berries. “I’ve kil ed once,” she snarled. “And I can do it again.”

A gleam of some emotion that Hol yleaf couldn’t read woke in her mother’s eyes. “Hol yleaf,” Leafpool meowed. “I have lost my kits, the one cat I loved, and my cal ing as a medicine cat. Which do you think would be easier for me, to die or to go on living?”

There was only one answer to that question.

Silently Hol yleaf stood aside, and Leafpool padded

past her and out of the den.





CHAPTER 28





Jayfeather slid through the thorn tunnel and stood



panting in the middle of the clearing. He had raced

back from the island as soon as the Gathering broke

up, struggling through the mass of bewildered cats to get across the tree-bridge.

He scented Leafpool leaving their den; right now

she was the last cat he wanted to talk to. Beyond her, fainter, he picked up Hol yleaf’s scent.

What’s she doing in our den? What did she say

to Leafpool?

Darting across the clearing, he crashed through the brambles and confronted his littermate.

“Hol yleaf! What are you doing here?” Sniffing, he detected another scent. “Why are those deathberries

out here?”

“Leave me alone!” Hol yleaf screeched.

Before Jayfeather could dodge, she leaped at

him, bowling him over and raking her claws across his shoulder. Jayfeather’s legs flailed and his hind paws connected with Hol yleaf’s bel y. Her anger and despair flooded over him as she gave him a cuff over the ear and fled out of the den.

“Hol yleaf, wait!” Jayfeather scrambled to his paws

and launched himself after her.

When he emerged into the clearing, Hol yleaf was



already plunging into the thorn tunnel. Jayfeather raced after her, his bel y fur brushing the ground as he broke out into the forest. The scents of more cats greeted him as the rest of the Gathering patrol returned to the camp.

“Jayfeather, what’s wrong?” Lionblaze cal ed out.

He turned and bounded along beside him. “What’s happening?” he gasped.

“It’s Hol yleaf,” Jayfeather panted. “We’ve got to catch her.”

Hol yleaf was heading deep into the forest,

crashing through bracken and brambles as if she had suddenly lost her sight.

“Hol yleaf, come back!” Lionblaze yowled. “We

need to talk!”

But Hol yleaf didn’t slacken her pace. Briefly she burst out onto the old Twoleg path that led past the abandoned den, then veered into the undergrowth again.

“I know where she’s going!” Jayfeather panted, feeling a chil run through him. “The old tunnels…”

“But she can’t!” Lionblaze sounded terrified.

“Hol yleaf, stop!”

Racing around a bramble thicket, Jayfeather and



Lionblaze came face-to-face with their sister; she had halted just inside the mouth of a tunnel halfway up the ridge, above the abandoned Twoleg nest. It wasn’t one Jayfeather had used before; there was a

stale scent of fox, overlaid with the smel of water and stone drifting from the darkness behind her.

Jayfeather tried to speak calmly. “Hol yleaf, you’ve got to listen to us.”

Hol yleaf didn’t seem to hear. “I’m sorry,” she meowed softly. “I was only trying to do what was best. I couldn’t let Ashfur live! For al our sakes! You understand that, don’t you?”

Jayfeather caught his breath. Beside him, he

heard Lionblaze gasp, “You kil ed Ashfur?”

If Hol yleaf replied, Jayfeather didn’t hear it. Hating his power more than he ever had before, he had reached out to his sister’s memories. She was stalking Ashfur along the WindClan border stream, treading lightly, avoiding boulders where her claws might scrape or ferns that would brush against her fur. Ashfur, intent on hunting, never noticed she was there. Hol yleaf fol owed him like a shadow until they came to a place where the bank was steep and slippery, and the stream was a foaming snake far slippery, and the stream was a foaming snake far below. She pounced on him from a rock, gripping his

shoulders with her forepaws and twisting her head around to sink her teeth into his throat. Inside the red mist that clouded her senses, Ashfur was nothing but prey, something that had to be kil ed to protect the warrior code and the future of her Clan.

Ashfur clawed feebly at her, but blood was

gushing from his throat. His body went limp and Hol yleaf leaped away, letting it crash into the stream. She stood watching it for a while, until the swift-flowing water had washed away the blood.

Then she padded up to a pool of water on top of the

bank and rinsed her paws, turning the water red.

Behind her, Ashfur’s body bobbed against the bank

before floating away downstream.

“He should have been swept into the lake and never seen again.” Hol yleaf’s voice wrenched

Jayfeather out of her terrible memories. “But they found him, and now everything is ruined. I can’t stay here.”

Despair vibrated in her voice. “I know I did the right thing, but no cat wil ever understand.”

There was a patter of paws as she turned and fled



down the tunnel. Running forward, Jayfeather could hear the roaring of the river underground, pounding hungrily against the stone.

“Hol yleaf, no!” he yowled. “We can figure this out

together—” A deafening rumble interrupted him; it went on and on. He pictured wet soil and rock raining down as the tunnel col apsed, crashing onto

his sister, knocking her to the floor, crushing her, burying her….

He darted forward. “Hollyleaf!”

Lionblaze charged into him, knocking him off his paws and pinning him down; Jayfeather writhed

furiously underneath him. “Let me up!” he screeched.

“We have to get her out!”

“We can’t help her,” Lionblaze growled. “The

tunnel has col apsed. There’s no way we can fol ow

her in.”

Jayfeather lay stil , panting, as the tumult of fal ing earth and stones died away. In the silence, Lionblaze stepped back and let him clamber to his paws.

Hol yleaf had seen the tunnels as a way to escape her Clan and everything that had gone wrong. Except

she hadn’t escaped—not in the way she wanted.

“It’s over,” Lionblaze meowed, his voice shaking.



“I don’t understand.” Jayfeather was trembling with

shock and grief. “She kil ed Ashfur to keep the secret safe. But then she revealed it to every cat at the Gathering.”

“It wasn’t the same.” Lionblaze pressed up

against him until Jayfeather felt his brother’s dismay mingling with his own. “Hol yleaf couldn’t bear the thought of being a medicine cat’s kit. She couldn’t bear the idea that she was half-Clan. The warrior code meant everything to her, and our birth smashed

it to pieces.”

“We should have done something,” Jayfeather

insisted. “What are we going to tel the Clan?”

Lionblaze let out an exhausted sigh. “We can’t tel

them she kil ed Ashfur. How can we let that be the only thing she’s remembered for?”

Jayfeather nodded. After al this, there was one more secret to keep, for Hol yleaf’s sake. “Let’s say that she chased a squirrel into the tunnel, and it col apsed on her. They can remember her for being

a brave hunter, feeding her Clan. They don’t need to know the truth—that she was trying to escape from them.”

Slowly they began limping back to the camp.



Jayfeather felt a fresh breeze ruffling his fur, and he drew in long, cold gulps of air. A new day was beginning, but al he wanted was to go back to his den, curl up, and try to escape into sleep. How could the sun rise today, after everything that had happened?

Suddenly he halted. “The prophecy!” he burst out.

Lionblaze, who had padded on a few paw steps,

stopped. “How can you think about that now?”

“But don’t you see?” Jayfeather clawed at the grass. “What happens to the prophecy if Hol yleaf is dead? It said there would be three cats, and now there are only two!”





Jayfeather stretched his cramped limbs and

turned his face up to the first feeble rays of the sun.

Al night his Clanmates had kept vigil for Hol yleaf, even though there was no body to be buried. Cats were beginning to stir around him, and a few fox-lengths away he could hear Brambleclaw quietly cal ing together the dawn patrol.

A ful day and night had passed since the

Gathering and the death of Hol yleaf in the tunnels.

The day before, Firestar had addressed the

shattered ThunderClan from the Highledge.

“Last night Hol yleaf revealed secrets that

shocked us al ,” he meowed. “But that prey is eaten.

There can be no going back. Instead we must find the way forward, for al of us.”

“What about the other Clans?” Dustpelt cal ed out.

“They al know what happened, thanks to Hol yleaf.”

“Maybe Hol yleaf should not have spoken out,”

Firestar admitted. “But she has paid terribly. As for the other Clans—they think we are broken. It’s up to us to show them that we are not. ThunderClan wil survive!”

Yowls of agreement rose from the listening cats; Jayfeather could feel their shock and distress giving way to a new sense of purpose.

Now he rose, gave himself a long stretch, and sat

down to groom his pelt, craning his neck to reach over to the fur on his back. After a few moments he

became aware of movement outside the nursery as

several of his Clanmates gathered there; he padded



across to find out what was going on.

“It’s Whitewing’s kits,” Lionblaze told him. “It’s the first time they’ve left the nursery.”

“Their eyes are open!” Whitewing was announcing

delightedly

as

Jayfeather

and

his

brother

approached. “Aren’t they beautiful?”

A loud squeaking and the patter of tiny paws drew

closer and then stopped. Jayfeather felt a powerful curiosity trained on him.

“Hel o, little kits,” Lionblaze murmured. “Welcome

to ThunderClan.”

“This one has such fluffy gray fur,” Sandstorm commented. “And the little one’s tabby-and-white pelt is so pretty. Have you given them names yet?”

“Yes.” It was Birchfal who replied, sounding ready

to burst with pride. “We’ve cal ed the gray one Dovekit, and the tabby-and-white one is Ivykit.”

“Those are beautiful names,” Brightheart purred.

The ginger-and-white she-cat was sitting close by,

with Cloudtail beside her, watching their daughter’s kits; Jayfeather could feel their happiness at seeing al their kin healthy and strong. It was brighter than the sun just breaking over the trees at the top of the hol ow.



Another scent wafted past him as Firestar

bounded up. “This is good to see,” the Clan leader

meowed. “They’l be apprentices before we know it.”

Jayfeather suddenly felt a jolt in his bel y like a blow from some cat’s paw. He clawed at Lionblaze.

“The prophecy…” he whispered.

“What? Get off!” Lionblaze sounded irritated.

“There wil be three, kin of your kin….”

Jayfeather’s voice shook as he wondered if he could

possibly be right. “Cloudtail is Firestar’s kin, Whitewing is Cloudtail’s daughter, and now Dovekit

and Ivykit…. Don’t you see? The prophecy isn’t over!

We aren’t the only kin of Firestar’s kin. It doesn’t matter which of Whitewing’s kits is the one. There are still three of us!”





Acknowledgments





Special thanks to Cherith Baldry





About the Author





ERIN HUNTER is inspired by a love of cats and a

fascination with the ferocity of the natural world. As wel as having great respect for nature in al its

forms, Erin enjoys creating rich mythical

explanations for animal behavior. She is also the

author of the bestsel ing Seekers series.





Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive

information on your favorite HarperCol ins author.





WARRIORS





Book One: Into the Wild

Book Two: Fire and Ice

Book Three: Forest of Secrets

Book Four: Rising Storm

Book Five: A Dangerous Path





Book Six: The Darkest Hour


WARRIORS:


THE NEW PROPHECY

Book One: Midnight

Book Two: Moonrise

Book Three: Dawn





Book Four: Starlight




Book Five: Twilight





Book Six: Sunset


WARRIORS:


POWER OF THREE

Book One: The Sight

Book Two: Dark River

Book Three: Outcast

Book Four: Eclipse





Book Five: Long Shadows


WARRIORS MANGA


The Lost Warrior

Warrior’s Refuge

Warrior’s Return

The Rise of Scourge

Tigerstar and Sasha #1: Into the Woods

Tigerstar and Sasha #2: Escape from the Forest

WARRIORS SPECIALS

Warriors Field Guide: Secrets of the Clans

Warriors Super Edition: Firestar’s Quest

Warriors: Cats of the Clans





Credits





Jacket art © 2009 by Wayne McLoughlin

Jacket design by Hilary Zarycky





Copyright





WARRIORS: POWER OF THREE #6: SUNRISE.

Copyright © 2009 by Working Partners Limited.

Series created by Working Partners Limited. Al rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the



required fees, you have been granted the non-

exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded,

decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCol ins e-books.

Adobe Digital Edition March 2009 ISBN 978-0-06-190606-0

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1





About the Publisher





Australia

HarperCol ins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia

http://www.harpercol insebooks.com.au

Canada

HarperCol ins Publishers Ltd.

55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900

Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada

http://www.harpercol insebooks.ca

New Zealand

HarperCol insPublishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercol ins.co.nz



United Kingdom

HarperCol ins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercol insebooks.co.uk

United States

HarperCol ins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercol insebooks.com





